docs(config): Configuration reference manual (#2352)
cometbft/cometbft: docs/references/config/config.toml.md

These style suggestions make it more readable.
--->
<style>
.PageContent table {margin: 0;}           /* tables are left-aligned */
</style>

<!--- Entry template: Use this as a template to add more parameter descriptions.
### tablename.property_key <- full path to property in the file
This is the two-sentence summary of the parameter. It does all kinds of stuff.
```toml
tablename.property_key = "default value"
```

| Value type          | string/bool/int/etc                | <- can be further clarified (duration, hex, base64-encoded)
|:--------------------|:-----------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | `"default value or exact example"` |
|                     | `generic description`              |

Lorem ipsum and everything else that you can think about this value and stuff.
This is the enhanced description and additional notes that is worth talking about.
Description about the possible values too.
--->

# config.toml
The `config.toml` file is a standard [TOML](https://toml.io/en/v1.0.0) file that configures the basic functionality
of CometBFT, including the configuration of the reactors.

All relative paths in the configuration are relative to `$CMTHOME`.

> (See [the HOME folder](README.md#the-home-folder) for more details.)

Reviewer: I think I fixed it. Will check when it is deployed to the website

## Base configuration
The root table defines generic node settings. It is implemented in a struct called `BaseConfig`, hence the name.

### version
The version of the CometBFT binary that created or last modified the config file.
```toml
version = "1.0.0"
```

| Value type          | string                  |
|:--------------------|:------------------------|
| **Possible values** | semantic version string |
|                     | `""`                    |

This string validates the configuration file for the binary. The string has to be either a
[valid semver](https://semver.org) string or an empty string. In any other case, the binary halts with an
`ERROR: error in config file: invalid version string` error.

In the future, the code might make restrictions on what version of the file is compatible with what version of the
binary. There is no such check in place right now. Configuration and binary versions are interchangeable.

### proxy_app

> The TCP or UNIX socket of the ABCI application or the name of the ABCI application compiled in with the CometBFT

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The TCP or UNIX socket of the ABCI application or the name of an example ABCI application compiled in with the CometBFT
```

Reviewer 2: I assume here that only names of example apps (the one listed on the table) are accepted here.

Monikers do not need to be unique. They are for local administrator use and troubleshooting.

Nodes on the peer-to-peer network are identified by `nodeID@IP:port` as discussed in the
[node_key.json](node_key.json.md) section.

### db_backend
The chosen database backend for the node.
```toml
db_backend = "goleveldb"
```

| Value type          | string        | dependencies  | GitHub                                           |
|:--------------------|:--------------|:--------------|:-------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | `"goleveldb"` | pure Golang   | [goleveldb](https://github.com/syndtr/goleveldb) |
|                     | `"cleveldb"`  | requires gcc  | [leveldb](https://github.com/google/leveldb)     |
|                     | `"boltdb"`    | pure Golang   | [bbolt](https://github.com/etcd-io/bbolt)        |
|                     | `"rocksdb"`   | requires gcc  | [grocksdb](https://github.com/linxGnu/grocksdb)  |
|                     | `"badgerdb"`  | pure Golang   | [badger](https://github.com/dgraph-io/badger)    |
|                     | `"pebbledb"`  | pure Golang   | [pebble](https://github.com/cockroachdb/pebble)  |

> During the build process, only the `goleveldb` library is built into the binary.

Reviewer 2: Is this also true for the binaries offered on GitHub?

Reviewer 3: Probably adding "by default" somewhere in this sentence will address @cason's concern

|                | `"events"`      | Events service logs                    |
|                | `"pubsub"`      | PubSub service logs                    |
|                | `"evidence"`    | Evidence reactor logs                  |
|                | `"statesync"`   | StateSync reactor logs                 |
|                | `"mempool"`     | Mempool reactor logs                   |
|                | `"blocksync"`   | BlockSync reactor logs                 |
|                | `"state"`       | Pruner service logs                    |
|                | `"*"`           | All modules                            |
| **Log levels** | `"debug"`       |                                        |
|                | `"info"`        |                                        |
|                | `"error"`       |                                        |
|                | `"none"`        |                                        |

At the end of a `module:level` list, a default log level can be set for modules with no level set. Use `*` instead of a
module name to set a default log level. The default is `*:info`.

Examples:

> Set the consensus reactor to `none` log level and the `p2p` reactor to `debug`. Everything else should be set to error:

Reviewer 2: This is a bad example, although valid. Put consensus on debug and p2p as none, ehehe

  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "level": {
      "description": "log level",
      "type": "string"
    },
    "ts": {
      "description": "timestamp in RFC3339Nano format; the trailing zeroes are removed from the seconds field",
      "type": "string"
    },
    "_msg": {
      "description": "core log message",
      "type": "string"
    },
    "module": {
      "description": "module name that emitted the log",
      "type": "string"
    },
    "impl": {
      "description": "some modules point out specific areas or tasks in log entries",
      "type": "string"
    },
    "msg": {
      "description": "some entries have more granular messages than just the core _msg",
      "type": "string"
    },
    "height": {
      "description": "some entries happen at a specific height",
      "type": "integer",
      "exclusiveMinimum": 0
    },
    "app_hash": {
      "description": "some entries happen at a specific app_hash",
      "type": "string"
    }
  },
  "required": [ "level", "ts", "_msg", "module" ]
}
```
> Note: The list of properties is not exhaustive. When implementing log parsing, check your logs and update the schema.

> <!--- Todo: Probably we should create separate schemas for the different log levels or modules. --->

Reviewer 2: Does anyone use the JSON format here?

More information on a supported signing service can be found in the [TMKMS](https://github.com/iqlusioninc/tmkms)
documentation.

### node_key_file
Path to the JSON file containing the private key to use for node authentication in the p2p protocol.
```toml
node_key_file = "config/node_key.json"
```

| Value type          | string                                          |
|:--------------------|:------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | relative directory path, appended to `$CMTHOME` |
|                     | absolute directory path                         |

The default relative path translates to `$CMTHOME/config/node_key.json`. In case `$CMTHOME` is unset, it defaults to
`$HOME/.cometbft/config/node_key.json`.

### abci
The mechanism used to connect to the ABCI application.
````toml
abci = "socket"
````

| Value type          | string     |
|:--------------------|:-----------|
| **Possible values** | `"socket"` |
|                     | `"grpc"`   |

This mechanism is used when connecting to the ABCI application over the [proxy_app](#proxy_app) socket.

### filter_peers

> When connecting to a new peer, filter the connection through an ABCI query to decide, if the connection should be kept.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When connecting to a new peer, filter the connection through an ABCI query to decide if the connection should be kept.
```

```toml
filter_peers = false
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `false` |
|                     | `true`  |

> When this setting is `true`, the ABCI application has to implement a query that returns `true` or `false` depending on

Reviewer 2: It actually returns an error:

https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/main/node/setup.go#L379-L415

if the ABCI application wants to keep the connection or drop it.

To filter the peers by remote address, the query `/p2p/filter/addr/(peer address)` has to return `true` or `false`.
Remote addresses have to be fully qualified, for example: `tcp://1.2.3.4:26656`.

To filter the peers by [node ID](node_key.json.md), the query `/p2p/filter/id/(peer ID)` has to return `true` or `false`
.

## RPC Server
These configuration options change the behaviour of the built-in RPC server.

### rpc.laddr
TCP or UNIX socket address for the RPC server to listen on.
```toml
laddr = "tcp://127.0.0.1:26657"
```

| Value type          | string                                            |
|:--------------------|:--------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | TCP Stream socket (`"tcp://127.0.0.1:26657"`)     |
|                     | Unix domain socket (`"unix:///var/run/rpc.sock"`) |

The RPC server endpoints have OpenAPI specification definitions through [Swagger UI](../../rpc).

> <!---

Reviewer 2: Pay attention to how comments are rendered in the docs website.

|                                         | `"Content-Type"`     |
|                                         | `"Range"`            |

The list of possible values are from the [Fetch spec](https://fetch.spec.whatwg.org/#cors-safelisted-request-header)
which defines `Origin` as a forbidden value. Read the
[Mozilla CORS documentation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS) and do your own tests, if you want
to use this key.

<!--- Possibly, we should clarify the allowed values better. --->

### rpc.unsafe
Activate unsafe RPC endpoints.
```toml
unsafe = false
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `false` |
|                     | `true`  |

| Unsafe RPC endpoints    | Description                                                                           |
|:------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `/dial_seeds`           | dials the given seeds (comma-separated id@IP:port)                                    |
| `/dial_peers`           | dials the given peers (comma-separated id@IP:port), optionally making them persistent |

> | `/unsafe_flush_mempool` | removes all transactions from the mempool                                             |

Reviewer 2: Is this comprehensive?

Keep this `false` on production systems.

### rpc.max_open_connections
Maximum number of simultaneous open connections. This includes WebSocket connections.
```toml
max_open_connections = 900
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt; 0  |

If you want to accept a larger number of connections than the default 900, make sure that you increase the maximum
number of open connections in the operating system. Usually, the `ulimit` command can help with that.

This value can be estimated by the following calculation:
```

> $(ulimit -Sn) - {p2p.max_num_inbound_peers} - {p2p.max_num_outbound_peers} - {number of WAL, DB and other open files}

Reviewer 2: We should also add the persistent peers, but this will become super complex.

Reviewer: I think we shouldn't get to overly complex here. I think this is good enough for the config. If we need to provide more insights on parameter calculations or estimations, we should do that on a separate guide for operators.

```

Estimating the number of WAL, DB and other files at `50`, and using the default soft limit of Debian Linux (`1024`):
```
1024 - 40 - 10 - 50 = 924 (~900)
```

Note, that macOS has a default soft limit of `256`. Make sure you calculate this value for the operating system CometBFT
runs on.

### rpc.max_subscription_clients
Maximum number of unique clientIDs that can subscribe to events at the `/subscribe` RPC endpoint.
```toml
max_subscription_clients = 100
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

> If you are using the `/broadcast_tx_commit` RPC endpoint, set this to the estimated maximum number of

Reviewer 2: Don't use the broadcast endpoint.

HTTP is always assumed as the protocol.

See the Golang [profiling](https://golang.org/pkg/net/http/pprof) documentation for more information.

## gRPC Server
These configuration options change the behaviour of the built-in gRPC server.

Each gRPC service can be turned on/off, and in some cases configured, individually.
If the gRPC server is not enabled, all individual services' configurations are ignored.

The gRPC server is exposed without any kind of security control or authentication. Do NOT expose this server
on the public Internet without appropriate precautions. Make sure it is secured, authenticated, load-balanced, etc.

### grpc.laddr
TCP or UNIX socket address for the gRPC server to listen on.
```toml
laddr = ""
```

| Value type          | string                                             |
|:--------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | TCP Stream socket (`"tcp://127.0.0.1:26658"`)      |
|                     | Unix domain socket (`"unix:///var/run/abci.sock"`) |
|                     | `""`                                               |

If not specified, the gRPC server will be disabled.

> ### grpc.version_service.enabled

Reviewer 2: This is for data companion, right?

Reviewer 2: Also for the next 2.

[`p2p.max_num_inbound_peers`](#p2pmax_num_inbound_peers) or the
[`p2p.max_num_outbound_peers`](#p2pmax_num_outbound_peers) are reached.

Contrary to other settings, only the node ID has to be defined here, not the IP:port of the remote node.

### p2p.persistent_peers_max_dial_period
Maximum pause when redialing a persistent peer.
```toml
persistent_peers_max_dial_period = "0s"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0s"`      |

If `"0s"` is set, then exponential backoff is applied to re-dial the remote node over and over.

<!--- Todo: add if there are any limitations to the exponential back-off. --->

### p2p.flush_throttle_timeout
Time to wait before flushing messages out on the connection.
```toml
flush_throttle_timeout = "100ms"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0ms"`     |

Write (flush) any buffered data to the connection. The flush is throttled, so if multiple triggers come in within the
duration, only one flush is executed.

Setting the value to `0ms` is possible, but the behaviour is undefined.

> <!--- Todo: trace the code and update what happens if this is set to 0. --->

Reviewer 2: This guy: https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/main/internal/timer/throttle_timer.go

Reviewer 2: And this guy: https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/main/p2p/conn/connection.go#L559

Reviewer 2: After a send routine, enables this timer to produce an event within flush_throttle_timeout. If set to zero, no sleep time here.

Reviewer 2: You probably should confirm with Ethan.

### p2p.max_packet_msg_payload_size
Maximum size of a message packet payload, in bytes.
```toml
max_packet_msg_payload_size = 1024
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt; 0  |

> The value represents the maximum size of a message payload (or message data) in bytes.

Reviewer 2: Actually a packet. Messages are split into packets.

### p2p.send_rate
Rate at which packets can be sent, in bytes/second.
```toml
send_rate = 5120000
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt; 0  |

The value represents the amount of packet bytes that can be sent per second.

### p2p.recv_rate
Rate at which packets can be received, in bytes/second.
```toml
recv_rate = 5120000
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt; 0  |

The value represents the amount of packet bytes that can be received per second.

### p2p.pex
Enable peer exchange reactor.

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `true`  |
|                     | `false` |

The peer exchange reactor is responsible for exchanging peer addresses among different nodes. If this is disabled, the

> node can only connect to addresses preconfigured in [`p2p.seeds`](#p2pseeds) or

Reviewer 2: No, no seeds. Seeds are dialed by the PEX reactor: https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/main/p2p/pex/pex_reactor.go#L630

[`p2p.persistent_peers`](#p2ppersistent_peers).

### p2p.seed_mode
In seed mode, the node crawls the network and looks for peers. Any incoming connections will provide the gathered
addresses and then it disconnects without providing any other information.
```toml
seed_mode = false
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `false` |
|                     | `true`  |

In seed mode, the node becomes an online address book. Any incoming connections can receive the gathered addresses but
no other information (for example blocks or consensus data) is provided. The node simply disconnects after sending the
addresses.

> The [`p2p.pex`](#p2ppex) option has to be set to `true` for the seed mode to work.

Reviewer 2: Consider https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/issues/309

### p2p.private_peer_ids
Comma separated list of peer IDs to keep private (will not be gossiped to other peers)
```toml
private_peer_ids = ""
```

| Value type                        | string (comma-separated list)     |
|:----------------------------------|:----------------------------------|
| **Possible values within commas** | nodeID (`"abcdef0123456789abcd"`) |
|                                   | `""`                              |

The addresses with the listed node IDs will not be sent to other peers, when the peer exchange reactor
([`p2p.pex`](#p2ppex)) is enabled. This allows a more granular setting instead of completely disabling the peer exchange
reactor.

For example, sentry nodes in the

> [Sentry Node Architecture](https://forum.cosmos.network/t/sentry-node-architecture-overview/454) on the Cosmos Hub can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Sentry Node Architecture](https://forum.cosmos.network/t/sentry-node-architecture-overview/454) on the Cosmos Hub must
```

use this setting to make sure they do not gossip the node ID of the validator node, while they can still accept node
addresses from the Internet.

### p2p.allow_duplicate_ip
Toggle to disable guard against peers connecting from the same ip.
```toml
allow_duplicate_ip = false
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `false` |
|                     | `true`  |

When this setting is set to `true`, multiple connections are allowed from the same IP address (for example on different
ports).

### p2p.handshake_timeout
Timeout duration for protocol handshake (or secret connection negotiation).
```toml
handshake_timeout = "20s"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0s"`      |

This high-level timeout value is applied when the TCP connection has been made and the peers are negotiating an upgrade
to secret connection.

> The value `"0s"` is undefined, and it can lead to unexpected behaviour.

Reviewer 2: Do we accept it?

### p2p.dial_timeout
Timeout duration for the low-level dialer that connects to the remote address on the TCP network.
```toml
dial_timeout = "3s"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0s"`      |

This parameter is the timeout value for dialing on TCP networks. If a hostname is used instead of an IP address and the
hostname resolves to multiple IP addresses, the timeout is spread over each consecutive dial, such that each is given an
appropriate fraction of the time to connect.

Setting the value to `"0s"` disables timeout.

## Mempool
Mempool allows gathering and broadcasting uncommitted transactions among nodes.

The **mempool** is a storage for uncommitted transactions; the **mempool cache** is an internal storage within the

> mempool, for invalid transactions. The mempool cache provides a list of known invalid transactions to filter out

Reviewer 2: Not really, regarding the cache.

The cache essentially stores recently seen transactions. This prevents us from verifying them and, also possibly gossiping them again.

The point regarding invalid transactions is whether we keep them or not in the cache. If we keep them, we will not consider this transaction again (while it is in cache). If we don't keep them, if the same transaction is received, we treat it as a new (never seen) one.

Reviewer: re-worded

incoming duplicate transactions without running a full validation on them.

### mempool.type
The type of mempool this node will use.
```toml
type = "flood"
```

| Value type          | string    |
|:--------------------|:----------|
| **Possible values** | `"flood"` |
|                     | `"nop"`   |

`"flood"` is the original mempool implemented for CometBFT. It is a concurrent linked list with flooding gossip
protocol.

> `"nop"` is a "no operation" or disabled mempool, where the ABCI application is responsible storing, disseminating and

Reviewer 2: May a link to the issue introducing it?

Reviewer: I think we should avoid having links to individual features implemented. If that's OK I'm not adding the link here.

proposing transactions. Note, that it requires empty blocks to be created:
[`consensus.create_empty_blocks = true`](#consensuscreate_empty_blocks) has to be set.

### mempool.recheck
Transaction validity check.
```toml
recheck = true
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `true`  |
|                     | `false` |

Committing a block affects the application state, hence the remaining transactions in the mempool after a block commit
might become invalid. Setting `recheck = true` will go through the remaining transactions and remove invalid ones.

### mempool.broadcast
Broadcast the mempool content (uncommitted transactions) to other nodes.
```toml
broadcast = true
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `true`  |
|                     | `false` |

This ensures that uncommitted transactions have a chance to reach multiple validators and get committed by one of them.

> Setting this to `false` will stop the mempool from relaying transactions to other peers until they are included in a

Reviewer 2: Not clear to me this explanation.

Reviewer 3: Yes, and I'd add an extra sentence: "Validators behind sentry nodes typically set this to `false`, as the sentry nodes take care of disseminating transactions to the rest of the network."

All other versions are deprecated.

## Consensus
Consensus parameters define how the consensus protocol should behave.

### consensus.wal_file
```toml
wal_file = "data/cs.wal/wal"
```

| Value type          | string                                          |
|:--------------------|:------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | relative directory path, appended to `$CMTHOME` |
|                     | absolute directory path                         |

The default relative path translates to `$CMTHOME/data/cs.wal/wal`. In case `$CMTHOME` is unset, it defaults to
`$HOME/.cometbft/data/cs.wal/wal`.

### consensus.timeout_propose
How long we wait for a proposal block before prevoting nil.
```toml
timeout_propose = "3s"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0s"`      |

### consensus.timeout_propose_delta
How much timeout_propose increases with each round.
```toml
timeout_propose_delta = "500ms"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0ms"`     |

### consensus.timeout_prevote

> How long we wait after receiving +2/3 prevotes for “anything” (ie. not a single block or nil).

Reviewer 2: ... before precommitting nil.

Reviewer: fixed

```toml
timeout_prevote = "1s"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0s"`      |

### consensus.timeout_prevote_delta
How much the timeout_prevote increases with each round.
```toml
timeout_prevote_delta = "500ms"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0ms"`     |

### consensus.timeout_precommit

> How long we wait after receiving +2/3 precommits for “anything” (ie. not a single block or nil).

Reviewer 2: ... before moving to the next round.

How many blocks to look back to check existence of the node's consensus votes before joining consensus.
```toml
double_sign_check_height = 0
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

When non-zero, the node will panic upon restart if the same consensus key was used to sign {double_sign_check_height}
last blocks. So, validators should stop the state machine, wait for some blocks, and then restart the state machine to
avoid panic.

### consensus.skip_timeout_commit
Make progress as soon as we have all the precommits.
```toml
skip_timeout_commit = false
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `false` |
|                     | `true`  |

This is similar to setting [`consensus.timeout_commit`](#consensustimeout_commit) to `"0s"`.

### consensus.create_empty_blocks
If there are no transactions in the mempool, empty blocks are proposed to indicate that the chain is still running.
```toml
create_empty_blocks = true
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `true`  |
|                     | `false` |

> This is more relevant to networks with a low number of transactions.

Reviewer 2: Important to remember: if there were state changes (app hash updated), empty blocks are produced in any case.

Reviewer: this has been reworded

### consensus.create_empty_blocks_interval
If there are no transactions in the mempool, empty blocks are proposed to indicate that the chain is still running at
this interval.
```toml

> create_empty_blocks_interval = "0s"

Reviewer 2: Does 0 mean wait forever?

Reviewer: seems so based on code logic and information below

```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0s"`      |

### consensus.peer_gossip_sleep_duration
Consensus reactor internal sleep duration when waiting for the next piece of calculation.
```toml
peer_gossip_sleep_duration = "100ms"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0ms"`     |

This is a generic sleep duration for the consensus reactor that allows other threads to run when the reactor has no work
to do.

### consensus.peer_gossip_intraloop_sleep_duration

> Consensus reactor upper bound for a random sleep duration.

Reviewer 2: Is this experimental?

Reviewer: doesn't seem so, it is used in the consensus reactor

```toml
peer_gossip_intraloop_sleep_duration = "0s"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0s"`     |

Random sleeps are inserted in the consensus reactor when it is waiting for HasProposalBlockPart messages and HasVote
messages, so it can reduce the amount of these messages sent. This parameter sets an upper bound for the random value
that is used for these sleep commands.

### consensus.peer_query_maj23_sleep_duration
Consensus reactor `queryMaj23Routine` function sleep time.
```toml
peer_query_maj23_sleep_duration = "2s"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0s"`      |

Sleep time for the `queryMaj23Routine` function.

## Storage
Storage parameters are important in production settings as it can make the difference between a 2GB data folder and a
20GB one.

> Storage pruning sets a flag in the CometBFT database for data that has expired. The database only deletes this data from
> the file system, when data compaction is called.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
CometBFT supports storage pruning to delete data indicated as not needed by the application or the data companion. Other than the pruning interval and compaction options, the configuration parameters in this section refer to the data companion. The applications pruning configuration is communicated to CometBFT via ABCI. 

Note that for some databases (GolevelDB), the data often does not get physically removed from storage due to the DB backend not triggering compaction. In these cases it is necessary to enable forced compaction and set the compaction interval accordingly. 
```

I will review this whole section later today but for now this statement is not 100% correct. 

Depending on the pruning interval, some physical deletions will happen. It will not happen enough to reflect what is desired by the pruning configuration (the storage will still grow). However, this seems to not be true for all DB backends either. In Pebble for example it seemed to actually delete the data as well.

| **Possible values** | TCP Stream socket (e.g. `"tcp://127.0.0.1:26657"`)     |

### p2p.external_address

TCP address that peers should use in order to connect to the node.
This is the address that the node advertises to peers.
If not set, the [listen address](#p2pladdr) is advertised.

Useful when the node is running on a non-routable address or when the
node does not have the capabilities to figure out its IP private address.
For example, this is useful when running from a cloud service (e.g, AWS, Digital Ocean).
In these scenarios, the public or external address of the node should be set to
`p2p.external_address`, while the private or internal address should be used as
the listen address ([`p2p.laddr`](#p2pladdr)).

```toml
external_address = ""
```

| Value type          | string                      |
|:--------------------|:----------------------------|
| **Possible values** | IP:port (`"1.2.3.4:26656"`) |
|                     | `""`                        |

The port has to point to the node's P2P port.

Example with a node on a non-routable network:
- Node has local or private IP address `10.10.10.10` and uses port `10000` for

>   P2P communication: set this addresses as the [listen address](#p2pladdr) (`p2p.laddr`).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  P2P communication: set this address as the [listen address](#p2pladdr) (`p2p.laddr`).
```

| **Possible values within commas** | nodeID@IP:port (`"abcd@1.2.3.4:26656"`) |
|                                   | `""`                                    |

The node will try to connect to any of the configured seed nodes when it needs
addresses of potential peers to connect.

Example:
```toml
seeds = "abcd@1.2.3.4:26656,deadbeef@5.6.7.8:10000"
```

### p2p.persistent_peers

Comma-separated list of nodes to keep persistent connections to.

```toml
persistent_peers = ""
```

| Value type                        | string (comma-separated list)           |
|:----------------------------------|:----------------------------------------|
| **Possible values within commas** | nodeID@IP:port (`"abcd@1.2.3.4:26656"`) |
|                                   | `""`                                    |

The node will attempt to establish connections to all configured persistent peers.
This in particular means that persistent peers do not count towards
the configured [`p2p.max_num_outbound_peers`](#p2pmax_num_outbound_peers)
(refer to [issue 1304](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/issues/1304) for more details).

> Moreover, if a connection to a persistent peers is lost, the node will attempt

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Moreover, if a connection to a persistent peer is lost, the node will attempt
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

The [`p2p.max_num_inbound_peers`](#p2pmax_num_inbound_peers) and
[`p2p.max_num_outbound_peers`](#p2pmax_num_outbound_peers) values
work together to define how many P2P connections the node will
maintain at maximum capacity.

Nodes configured as [unconditional peers](#p2punconditional_peer_ids) do not count towards the
configured `p2p.max_num_inbound_peers` limit.

The connections are bidirectional, so any connection can send or receive messages, blocks, and other data. The separation into
inbound and outbound setting only distinguishes the initial setup of the connection: outbound connections are initiated
by the node while inbound connections are initiated by a remote party.

Nodes on non-routable networks have to set their gateway to port-forward the P2P port for inbound connections to reach
the node. Inbound connections can be accepted as long as the node has an address accessible from the Internet (using NAT or other methods).
Refer to the [p2p.external_address](#p2pexternal_address) configuration for details.

### p2p.max_num_outbound_peers

Maximum number of outbound peers,

> that is, peers to which the node dials and established connections.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
that is, peers to which the node dials and establishes connections.
```

### p2p.seed_mode

In seed mode, the node crawls the network and looks for peers.

```toml
seed_mode = false
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `false` |
|                     | `true`  |

In seed mode, the node becomes an online address book. Any incoming connections
can receive a sample of the gathered addresses but no other information (for
example blocks or consensus data) is provided. The node simply disconnects
from the peer after sending the addresses.

Nodes operating in seed mode should configured as [seeds](#p2pseeds) for other
nodes in the network.

The [`p2p.pex`](#p2ppex) option has to be set to `true` for the seed mode to work.

### p2p.private_peer_ids

Comma separated list of peer IDs to keep private, they will not be gossiped to other peers.

```toml
private_peer_ids = ""
```

| Value type                        | string (comma-separated list)     |
|:----------------------------------|:----------------------------------|
| **Possible values within commas** | nodeID (`"abcdef0123456789abcd"`) |
|                                   | `""`                              |

> The addresses with the listed node IDs will not be sent to other peers, when the PEX reactor

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The addresses with the listed node IDs will not be sent to other peers when the PEX reactor
```

|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0s"`      |

This parameter is the timeout value for dialing on TCP networks. If a hostname is used instead of an IP address and the
hostname resolves to multiple IP addresses, the timeout is spread over each consecutive dial, such that each is given an
appropriate fraction of the time to connect.

Setting the value to `"0s"` disables the timeout.

## Mempool
Mempool allows gathering and broadcasting uncommitted transactions among nodes.

The **mempool** is storage for uncommitted transactions; the **mempool cache** is internal storage within the
mempool for seen transactions. The mempool cache provides a list of transactions already received to filter out
incoming duplicate transactions and prevent duplicate full transaction validations.

### mempool.type
The type of mempool this node will use.
```toml
type = "flood"
```

| Value type          | string    |
|:--------------------|:----------|
| **Possible values** | `"flood"` |
|                     | `"nop"`   |

`"flood"` is the original mempool implemented for CometBFT. It is a concurrent linked list with flooding gossip
protocol.

> `"nop"` is a "no operation" or disabled mempool, where the ABCI application is responsible storing, disseminating and

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
`"nop"` is a "no operation" or disabled mempool, where the ABCI application is responsible for storing, disseminating and
```

to re-join consensus with the same state it has before crashing.
Recovering nodes that "forget" the actions taken before crashing are faulty
nodes that are likely to present Byzantine behavior (e.g., double signing).

### consensus.timeout_propose

How long a node waits for the proposal block before prevoting nil.

```toml
timeout_propose = "3s"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0s"`      |

The proposal block of a round of consensus is broadcast by the proposer of that round.
The `timeout_propose` should be large enough to encompass the common-case
propagation delay of a `Proposal` and one or more `BlockPart` (depending on the
proposed block size) messages from any validator to the node.

If the proposed block is not received within `timeout_propose`, validators
issue a prevote for nil, indicating that they have not received, and
therefore are unable to vote for, the block proposed in that round.

Setting `timeout_propose` to `0s` means that the validator does not wait at all
for the proposal block and always prevotes nil.

> This has obvious liveness implications, since this validator will never prevote

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This has obvious liveness implications since this validator will never prevote
```

round of consensus will adopt increased timeout durations.
Timeouts increase linearly over rounds, so that the `timeout_precommit` adopted
in round `r` is `timeout_precommit + r * timeout_precommit_delta`.

### consensus.timeout_commit

How long a node waits after committing a block, before starting on the next height.

```toml
timeout_commit = "1s"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0s"`      |

The `timeout_commit` represents the minimum interval between the commit of a
block until the start of the next height of consensus.
It gives the node a chance to gather additional precommits for the committed
block, more than the mandatory +2/3 precommits required to commit a block.
The more precommits are gathered for a block, the greater are the safety
guarantees and the easier is to detect misbehaving validators.

The `timeout_commit` is not a required component of the consensus algorithm,
meaning that there are no liveness implications if it is set to `0s`.
But it does have implications in the way the application rewards validators.

### consensus.double_sign_check_height

> How many blocks to look back to check existence of the node's consensus votes before joining consensus.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
How many blocks to look back to check the existence of the node's consensus votes before joining consensus.
```

| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

When non-zero, the validator will panic upon restart if the validator's current
consensus key was used to sign any precommit message for the last
`double_sign_check_height` blocks.
If this happens, the validators should stop the state machine, wait for some
blocks, and then restart the state machine again.

### consensus.skip_timeout_commit

Start the next height as soon as the node gathers all the mandatory +2/3 precommits for a block.

```toml
skip_timeout_commit = false
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `false` |
|                     | `true`  |

Setting `skip_timeout_commit` to `true` has the similar effect as setting [`timeout_commit`](#consensustimeout_commit) to `"0s"`.

### consensus.create_empty_blocks

Propose empty blocks if the validator's mempool does not have any transaction.

```toml
create_empty_blocks = true
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `true`  |
|                     | `false` |

When set to `true`, empty blocks are produced and proposed to indicate that the
chain is still operative.

> When set to `false`, blocks are not produced or proposed while there not
> transactions in the validator's mempool.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When set to `false`, blocks are not produced or proposed while there are no
transactions in the validator's mempool.
```

### consensus.peer_query_maj23_sleep_duration

Consensus reactor interval between querying peers for +2/3 vote majorities.

```toml
peer_query_maj23_sleep_duration = "2s"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0s"`      |

The consensus reactor gossips consensus messages, by sending or forwarding them
to peers.

The `VoteSetMaj23` message is used by the consensus reactor to query peers
regarding vote messages (prevotes or precommits) they have for a specific
block.
These queries are only triggered when +2/3 votes are observed.

The value of `peer_query_maj23_sleep_duration` is the interval between sending
those queries to a peer.

## Storage
Storage parameters are important in production settings as it can make the difference between a 2GB data folder and a
20GB one.

CometBFT supports storage pruning to delete data indicated as not needed by the application or the data companion. Other than the pruning interval and compaction options, the configuration parameters in this section refer to the data companion. The applications pruning configuration is communicated to CometBFT via ABCI.

> Note that for some databases (GolevelDB), the data often does not get physically removed from storage due to the DB backend not triggering compaction. In these cases it is necessary to enable forced compaction and set the compaction interval accordingly.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Note that for some databases (GolevelDB), the data often does not get physically removed from storage due to the DB backend not triggering compaction. In these cases, it is necessary to enable forced compaction and set the compaction interval accordingly.
```

If the data companion has already set a block retain height, this is ignored.
```toml
double_sign_check_height = 0
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

### storage.pruning.data_companion.initial_block_results_retain_height
The initial value for the data companion block results retain height if the data companion has not yet explicitly set
one. If the data companion has already set a block results retain height, this is ignored.
```toml
initial_block_results_retain_height = 0
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

### storage.pruning.data_companion.genesis_hash
Hash of the Genesis file, passed to CometBFT via the command line.
```toml
genesis_hash = ""
```

| Value type          | string             |
|:--------------------|:-------------------|
| **Possible values** | hex-encoded number |
|                     | `""`               |

If this hash mismatches the hash that CometBFT computes on the genesis file, the node is not able to boot.

## Transaction indexer
Transaction indexer settings.

The application will set which txs to index.

> In some cases a node operator will be able to decide which txs to index based on configuration set in the application.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In some cases, a node operator will be able to decide which txs to index based on the configuration set in the application.
```

```

| Value type          | string   |
|:--------------------|:---------|
| **Possible values** | `"kv"`   |
|                     | `"null"` |
|                     | `"psql"` |

`"null"` indexer indexes nothing.

`"kv"` is the simplest possible indexer, backed by a key-value storage.
The key-value storage database backend is defined in [`db_backend`](#db_backend).

`"psql"` indexer is backed by an external PostgreSQL server.
The server connection string is defined in [`tx_index.psql-conn`](#tx_indexpsql-conn).

The transaction height and transaction hash is always indexed, except with the `"null"` indexer.

### tx_index.psql-conn
The PostgreSQL connection configuration.
```toml
psql-conn = ""
```

| Value type          | string                                                       |
|:--------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | `"postgresql://<user>:<password>@<host>:<port>/<db>?<opts>"` |
|                     | `""`                                                         |

## Prometheus Instrumentation
An extensive amount of Prometheus metrics are built into CometBFT.

### instrumentation.prometheus

> Enable or disabled presenting the Prometheus metrics at an endpoint.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Enable or disable presenting the Prometheus metrics at an endpoint.
```

|:--------------------|:-----------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | `"default value or exact example"` |
|                     | `generic description`              |

Lorem ipsum and everything else that you can think about this value and stuff.
This is the enhanced description and additional notes that is worth talking about.
Description about the possible values too.
--->

# config.toml
The `config.toml` file is a standard [TOML](https://toml.io/en/v1.0.0) file that configures the basic functionality
of CometBFT, including the configuration of the reactors.

All relative paths in the configuration are relative to `$CMTHOME`.
(See [the HOME folder](./README.md#the-home-folder) for more details.)

## Base configuration
The root table defines generic node settings. It is implemented in a struct called `BaseConfig`, hence the name.

### version
The version of the CometBFT binary that created or last modified the config file.
```toml
version = "1.0.0"
```

| Value type          | string                  |
|:--------------------|:------------------------|
| **Possible values** | semantic version string |

> |                     | `""`                    |

Reviewer 3: Would it make sense to indicate what the default value is, if this field is absent?

Reviewer 2: The default value is defined in `version/version.go`. So it depends on the branch/release?

Reviewer 3: Ok, this is not critical. Let's resolve.

binary. There is no such check in place right now. Configuration and binary versions are interchangeable.

### proxy_app
The TCP or UNIX socket of the ABCI application or the name of an example ABCI application compiled in with the CometBFT
library.
```toml
proxy_app = "tcp://127.0.0.1:26658"
```

| Value type          | string                                                  |
|:--------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | TCP Stream socket (e.g. `"tcp://127.0.0.1:26658"`)      |
|                     | Unix domain socket (e.g. `"unix:///var/run/abci.sock"`) |
|                     | `"kvstore"`                                             |
|                     | `"persistent_kvstore"`                                  |
|                     | `"noop"`                                                |

When the ABCI application is written in a different language than Golang, (for example the
[Nomic binary](https://github.com/nomic-io/nomic) is written in Rust) the application can open a TCP port or create a
UNIX domain socket to communicate with CometBFT, while CometBFT runs as a separate process.

> 

Reviewer 3: I would add here a couple of sentences here to say that the "TCP Stream socket" can take different ports. Also, that using an IP address different from `localhost` (IPv4: `127.0.0.1`, IPv6: `::1`) is strongly discouraged (because it has strong performance and security implications)

|                     | `"boltdb"`    | pure Golang   | [bbolt](https://github.com/etcd-io/bbolt)        |
|                     | `"rocksdb"`   | requires gcc  | [grocksdb](https://github.com/linxGnu/grocksdb)  |
|                     | `"badgerdb"`  | pure Golang   | [badger](https://github.com/dgraph-io/badger)    |
|                     | `"pebbledb"`  | pure Golang   | [pebble](https://github.com/cockroachdb/pebble)  |

During the build process, only the `goleveldb` library is built into the binary.
To add support for alternative databases, you need to add them in the build tags.
For example: `go build -tags cleveldb,rocksdb`.

The RocksDB fork has API changes from the upstream RocksDB implementation. All other databases claim a stable API.

The CometBFT team tests rely on the GoLevelDB implementation. All other implementations are considered experimental from
a CometBFT perspective. The supported databases are part of the [cometbft-db](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft-db) library
that CometBFT uses as a common database interface to various databases.

### db_dir
The directory path where the database is stored.
```toml
db_dir = "data"
```

> | Value type          | string                                                      |
> |:--------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------|

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Value type          | string                                           |
|:--------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|
```

|                | `"events"`      | Events service logs                    |
|                | `"pubsub"`      | PubSub service logs                    |
|                | `"evidence"`    | Evidence reactor logs                  |
|                | `"statesync"`   | StateSync reactor logs                 |
|                | `"mempool"`     | Mempool reactor logs                   |
|                | `"blocksync"`   | BlockSync reactor logs                 |
|                | `"state"`       | Pruner service logs                    |
|                | `"*"`           | All modules                            |
| **Log levels** | `"debug"`       |                                        |
|                | `"info"`        |                                        |
|                | `"error"`       |                                        |
|                | `"none"`        |                                        |

At the end of a `module:level` list, a default log level can be set for modules with no level set. Use `*` instead of a
module name to set a default log level. The default is `*:info`.

Examples:

> Set the consensus reactor to `none` log level and the `p2p` reactor to `debug`. Everything else should be set to error:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Set the consensus reactor to `debug` log level and the `p2p` reactor to `none`. Everything else should be set to `error`:
```

Reviewer: makes sense

```toml

> log_level = "consensus:none,p2p:debug,*:error"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
log_level = "consensus:debug,p2p:none,*:error"
```

Reviewer: thanks

      "type": "string"
    },
    "ts": {
      "description": "timestamp in RFC3339Nano format; the trailing zeroes are removed from the seconds field",
      "type": "string"
    },
    "_msg": {
      "description": "core log message",
      "type": "string"
    },
    "module": {
      "description": "module name that emitted the log",
      "type": "string"
    },
    "impl": {
      "description": "some modules point out specific areas or tasks in log entries",
      "type": "string"
    },
    "msg": {
      "description": "some entries have more granular messages than just the core _msg",
      "type": "string"
    },
    "height": {
      "description": "some entries happen at a specific height",
      "type": "integer",
      "exclusiveMinimum": 0
    },
    "app_hash": {
      "description": "some entries happen at a specific app_hash",
      "type": "string"
    }
  },
  "required": [ "level", "ts", "_msg", "module" ]
}
```
> Note: The list of properties is not exhaustive. When implementing log parsing, check your logs and update the schema.

<!--- Todo: Probably we should create separate schemas for the different log levels or modules. --->

### genesis_file

> Path to the JSON file containing the initial validator set and other meta-data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Path to the JSON file containing the initial state of the application (more details [here](./genesis.json.md)).
```

Reviewer: re-worded a bit

```toml
genesis_file = "config/genesis.json"
```

| Value type          | string                                          |
|:--------------------|:------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | relative directory path, appended to `$CMTHOME` |
|                     | absolute directory path                         |

The default relative path translates to `$CMTHOME/config/genesis.json`. In case `$CMTHOME` is unset, it defaults to
`$HOME/.cometbft/config/genesis.json`.

### priv_validator_key_file

> Path to the JSON file containing the private key to use as a validator in the consensus protocol.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Path to the JSON file containing the private key to use as a validator in the consensus protocol (more details [here](./priv_validator_key.json.md)).
```

```toml
priv_validator_key_file = "config/priv_validator_key.json"
```

| Value type          | string                                          |
|:--------------------|:------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | relative directory path, appended to `$CMTHOME` |
|                     | absolute directory path                         |

The default relative path translates to `$CMTHOME/config/priv_validator_key.json`. In case `$CMTHOME` is unset, it
defaults to `$HOME/.cometbft/config/priv_validator_key.json`.

### priv_validator_state_file

> Path to the JSON file containing the last sign state of a validator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Path to the JSON file containing the last sign state of a validator  (more details [here](./priv_validator_state.json.md)).
```

> Path to the JSON file containing the last sign state of a validator  (more details [here](./priv_validator_state.json.md)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Path to the JSON file containing the last sign state of a validator (more details [here](./priv_validator_state.json.md)).
```

The default relative path translates to `$CMTHOME/data/priv_validator_state.json`. In case `$CMTHOME` is unset, it
defaults to `$HOME/.cometbft/data/priv_validator_state.json`.

### priv_validator_laddr
TCP or UNIX socket listen address for CometBFT that allows external consensus signing processes to connect.
```toml
priv_validator_laddr = ""
```

| Value type          | string                                                     |
|:--------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | TCP Stream socket (e.g. `"tcp://127.0.0.1:26665"`)         |
|                     | Unix domain socket (e.g. `"unix:///var/run/privval.sock"`) |

When consensus signing is outsourced from CometBFT (typically to a Hardware Security Module, like a
[YubiHSM](https://www.yubico.com/product/yubihsm-2) device), this address is opened by CometBFT for incoming connections
from the signing service.

Make sure the port is available on the host machine and firewalls allow the signing service to connect to it.

More information on a supported signing service can be found in the [TMKMS](https://github.com/iqlusioninc/tmkms)
documentation.

### node_key_file

> Path to the JSON file containing the private key to use for node authentication in the p2p protocol.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Path to the JSON file containing the private key to use for node authentication in the p2p protocol (more details [here](./node_key.json.md)).
```

| **Possible values** | relative directory path, appended to `$CMTHOME` |
|                     | absolute directory path                         |

The default relative path translates to `$CMTHOME/config/node_key.json`. In case `$CMTHOME` is unset, it defaults to
`$HOME/.cometbft/config/node_key.json`.

### abci
The mechanism used to connect to the ABCI application.
````toml
abci = "socket"
````

| Value type          | string     |
|:--------------------|:-----------|
| **Possible values** | `"socket"` |
|                     | `"grpc"`   |

This mechanism is used when connecting to the ABCI application over the [proxy_app](#proxy_app) socket.

### filter_peers
When connecting to a new peer, filter the connection through an ABCI query to decide, if the connection should be kept.
```toml
filter_peers = false
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `false` |
|                     | `true`  |

When this setting is `true`, the ABCI application has to implement a query that returns `true` or `false` depending on
if the ABCI application wants to keep the connection or drop it.

> To filter the peers by remote address, the query `/p2p/filter/addr/(peer address)` has to return `true` or `false`.

Reviewer 2: The query string is hard-coded. But I like the idea of adding a way to check whether the application is implementing this query. I assume that if it does not, it is irrelevant.

The problem of suggesting a command is that the ABCI address can be anything...

> To filter the peers by remote address, the query `/p2p/filter/addr/(peer address)` has to return `true` or `false`.

Reviewer 5: We have examples of addresses everywhere, also for the `peer address`. My concern is that what is there currently is not very useful. What would the reader miss if we don't specify the exact query string?

> To filter the peers by remote address, the query `/p2p/filter/addr/(peer address)` has to return `true` or `false`.

Reviewer 2: How would the reader know what are the query paths the application has to implement?

Ok, they are described https://docs.cometbft.com/v0.38/spec/abci/abci++_app_requirements#peer-filtering. Maybe we can just point to that spec.

Remote addresses have to be fully qualified, for example: `tcp://1.2.3.4:26656`.

To filter the peers by [node ID](node_key.json.md), the query `/p2p/filter/id/(peer ID)` has to return `true` or `false`
.

## RPC Server
These configuration options change the behaviour of the built-in RPC server.

### rpc.laddr
TCP or UNIX socket address for the RPC server to listen on.
```toml
laddr = "tcp://127.0.0.1:26657"
```

| Value type          | string                                            |
|:--------------------|:--------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | TCP Stream socket (e.g. `"tcp://127.0.0.1:26657"`)     |
|                     | Unix domain socket (e.g. `"unix:///var/run/rpc.sock"`) |

The RPC server endpoints have OpenAPI specification definitions through [Swagger UI](../../rpc).
<!---
NOTE: The OpenAPI reference (../../rpc) is injected into the documentation during
the CometBFT docs build process. See https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft-docs/
for details.
--->

> You can also read the [RPC specification](../../spec/rpc) for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please refer to the [RPC documentation](https://docs.cometbft.com/v1.0/rpc/) for more information.
```

not cause an error and creates unpredictability.
Enabling this setting creates a predictable outcome by closing the WebSocket connection in case it cannot read events
fast enough.

### rpc.timeout_broadcast_tx_commit
Timeout waiting for a transaction to be committed when using the `/broadcast_tx_commit` RPC endpoint.
```toml
timeout_broadcast_tx_commit = "10s"
```

| Value type          | string (duration)          |
|:--------------------|:---------------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt; `"0s"`; &lt;= `"10s"` |

Using a value larger than `"10s"` will result in increasing the global HTTP write timeout, which applies to all connections
and endpoints. There is an old developer discussion about this [here](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/3435).

> Note: It is generally recommended *not* to use the `broadcast_tx_commit` method in production, and instead prefer `/broadcast_tx_sync`.

### rpc.max_body_bytes
Maximum size of request body, in bytes.
```toml
max_body_bytes = 1000000
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

### rpc.max_header_bytes
Maximum size of request header, in bytes.
```toml

> max_header_bytes = 1048576

Reviewer 2: Why is this bigger than `max_body_bytes`?

Reviewer: that's the same as the default go maximum header size in the `net/http` package. Maybe in the future we should evaluate the max_body_bytes to see if it is still a good value.

invalid transactions. Turning this setting on will keep them in the list of invalid transactions forever.
```toml
keep-invalid-txs-in-cache = false
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `false` |
|                     | `true`  |

Invalid transactions might become valid at a later time. The mempool cache clears invalid transactions regularly so the
transactions can be re-validated.

If this setting is set to `true`, the mempool cache will NOT remove the invalid transactions. It is useful in cases when
invalidated transactions can never become valid again.

This setting can be used by operators to lower the impact of some spam transactions: when a large number of duplicate
spam transactions are noted on the network, temporarily turning this setting to `true` will filter out the duplicates
quicker than validating each transaction one-by-one. It will also filter out transactions that are supposed to become
valid at a later date, so it is not advised to keep this `true` for a long time on regular networks as it can lead to
valid transactions failing.

> ### mempool.max_tx_bytes

Reviewer 3: Done

|                                         | `"POST"`        |

You can read more about the methods in the
[Mozilla CORS documentation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS).

### rpc.cors_allowed_headers
A list of headers the client is allowed to use with cross-domain requests.
```toml
cors_allowed_headers = ["Origin", "Accept", "Content-Type", "X-Requested-With", "X-Server-Time", ]
```

| Value type                              | array of string      |
|:----------------------------------------|:---------------------|
| **Possible string values in the array** | `"Accept"`           |
|                                         | `"Accept-Language"`  |
|                                         | `"Content-Language"` |
|                                         | `"Content-Type"`     |
|                                         | `"Range"`            |

The list of possible values are from the [Fetch spec](https://fetch.spec.whatwg.org/#cors-safelisted-request-header)
which defines `Origin` as a forbidden value. Read the
[Mozilla CORS documentation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS) and do your own tests, if you want
to use this key.

> <!--- Possibly, we should clarify the allowed values better. --->

Reviewer: we can improve in the future if needed or there are requests from users for it. Since CORS is a widely adopted concept, I believe it's out of scope to provide a very detailed information here.

|:------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `/dial_seeds`           | dials the given seeds (comma-separated id@IP:port)                                    |
| `/dial_peers`           | dials the given peers (comma-separated id@IP:port), optionally making them persistent |
| `/unsafe_flush_mempool` | removes all transactions from the mempool                                             |

Keep this `false` on production systems.

### rpc.max_open_connections
Maximum number of simultaneous open connections. This includes WebSocket connections.
```toml
max_open_connections = 900
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt; 0  |

If you want to accept a larger number of connections than the default 900, make sure that you increase the maximum
number of open connections in the operating system. Usually, the `ulimit` command can help with that.

This value can be estimated by the following calculation:
```
$(ulimit -Sn) - {p2p.max_num_inbound_peers} - {p2p.max_num_outbound_peers} - {number of WAL, DB and other open files}
```

> Estimating the number of WAL, DB and other files at `50`, and using the default soft limit of Debian Linux (`1024`):

Reviewer: I think we shouldn't get to overly complex here. I think this is good enough for the config. If we need to provide more insights on parameter calculations or estimations, we should do that on a separate guide for operators.

|:--------------------|:-----------------------------|
| **Possible values** | IP:port (`"127.0.0.1:6060"`) |
|                     | :port (`":6060"`)            |
|                     | `""`                         |

HTTP is always assumed as the protocol.

See the Golang [profiling](https://golang.org/pkg/net/http/pprof) documentation for more information.

## gRPC Server
These configuration options change the behaviour of the built-in gRPC server.

Each gRPC service can be turned on/off, and in some cases configured, individually.
If the gRPC server is not enabled, all individual services' configurations are ignored.

The gRPC server is exposed without any kind of security control or authentication. Do NOT expose this server
on the public Internet without appropriate precautions. Make sure it is secured, authenticated, load-balanced, etc.

### grpc.laddr
TCP or UNIX socket address for the gRPC server to listen on.
```toml
laddr = ""
```

| Value type          | string                                             |
|:--------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | TCP Stream socket (`"tcp://127.0.0.1:26658"`)      |

> |                     | Unix domain socket (`"unix:///var/run/abci.sock"`) |

Reviewer: unix is OK

### grpc.block_service.enabled
The gRPC block service returns block information.
```toml
enabled = true
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `true`  |
|                     | `false` |

If [`grpc.laddr`](#grpcladdr) is empty, this setting is ignored and the service is not enabled.

### grpc.block_results_service.enabled
The gRPC block results service returns block results for a given height. If no height is given, it will return the block
results from the latest height.
```toml
enabled = true
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `true`  |
|                     | `false` |

If [`grpc.laddr`](#grpcladdr) is empty, this setting is ignored and the service is not enabled.

### grpc.privileged.laddr
Configuration for privileged gRPC endpoints, which should **never** be exposed to the public internet.
```toml
laddr = ""
```

| Value type          | string                                             |
|:--------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|

> | **Possible values** | TCP Stream socket (`"tcp://127.0.0.1:26658"`)      |

Reviewer: improved in fa8840c2d7de17a6e125b7b504a6c3a180af92d1

### mempool.max_txs_bytes
The maximum size of all transactions accepted in the mempool.
```toml
max_txs_bytes = 1073741824
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

This is the raw, total transaction size. Given 1MB transactions and a 5MB maximum transaction size, mempool will only
accept five transactions.

The default value is 1 Gibibytes (2^30 bytes).

### mempool.cache_size
Mempool internal cache size for invalid transactions.
```toml
cache_size = 10000
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

The mempool cache is an internal store for invalid transactions. Storing invalid transactions help in filtering incoming
transactions: we can compare incoming transactions to known invalid transactions and filter them out without going
through the process of validating the incoming transaction.

### mempool.keep-invalid-txs-in-cache
Invalid transactions might become valid in the future, hence they are regularly removed from the mempool cache of
invalid transactions. Turning this setting on will keep them in the list of invalid transactions forever.

> # Do not remove invalid transactions from the cache (default: false)
> # Set to true if it's not possible for any invalid transaction to become valid
> # again in the future.

Reviewer 6: This renders in very large letters in the staging site:
```suggestion
**Do not remove invalid transactions from the cache (default: false)**
Set to `true` if it's not possible for any invalid transaction to become valid again in the future.
```

While this might reduce latency, it may degrade throughput as batching
outstanding messages is essentially disabled.

### p2p.max_packet_msg_payload_size

Maximum size of a packet payload, in bytes.

```toml
max_packet_msg_payload_size = 1024
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt; 0  |

Messages exchanged via P2P connections are split into packets.
Packets contain some metadata and message data (payload).
The value configures the maximum size in bytes of the payload
included in a packet.

### p2p.send_rate

Rate at which packets can be sent, in bytes/second.

```toml
send_rate = 5120000
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt; 0  |

The value represents the amount of packet bytes that can be sent per second
by each P2P connection.

### p2p.recv_rate

Rate at which packets can be received, in bytes/second.

```toml
recv_rate = 5120000
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt; 0  |

The value represents the amount of packet bytes that can be received per second
by each P2P connection.

### p2p.pex

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```toml
pex = true
```

```

outstanding messages is essentially disabled.

### p2p.max_packet_msg_payload_size

Maximum size of a packet payload, in bytes.

```toml
max_packet_msg_payload_size = 1024
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt; 0  |

Messages exchanged via P2P connections are split into packets.
Packets contain some metadata and message data (payload).
The value configures the maximum size in bytes of the payload
included in a packet.

### p2p.send_rate

Rate at which packets can be sent, in bytes/second.

```toml
send_rate = 5120000
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt; 0  |

The value represents the amount of packet bytes that can be sent per second
by each P2P connection.

### p2p.recv_rate

Rate at which packets can be received, in bytes/second.

```toml
recv_rate = 5120000
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt; 0  |

The value represents the amount of packet bytes that can be received per second
by each P2P connection.

### p2p.pex

```toml
pex = true

> Enable peer exchange (PEX) reactor.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

\`\`\`
Enable peer exchange (PEX) reactor.
```

|:--------------------|:------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | relative directory path, appended to `$CMTHOME` |
|                     | absolute directory path                         |

The default relative path translates to `$CMTHOME/config/node_key.json`. In case `$CMTHOME` is unset, it defaults to
`$HOME/.cometbft/config/node_key.json`.

### abci
The mechanism used to connect to the ABCI application.
````toml
abci = "socket"
````

| Value type          | string     |
|:--------------------|:-----------|
| **Possible values** | `"socket"` |
|                     | `"grpc"`   |
|                     | `""    `   |

This mechanism is used when connecting to the ABCI application over the [proxy_app](#proxy_app) socket.

### filter_peers
When connecting to a new peer, filter the connection through an ABCI query to decide, if the connection should be kept.
```toml
filter_peers = false
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `false` |
|                     | `true`  |

When this setting is `true`, the ABCI application has to implement a query that will allow 

> the ABCI application to keep the connection or drop it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the connection to be kept of or dropped.
```

> This feature is likely to be deprecated

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This feature is likely to be deprecated.
```

## RPC Server
These configuration options change the behaviour of the built-in RPC server.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

The RPC server is exposed without any kind of security control or authentication. Do NOT expose this server
on the public Internet without appropriate precautions. Make sure it is secured, load-balanced, etc.

```

Maximum number of simultaneous open connections. This includes WebSocket connections.
```toml
max_open_connections = 900
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt; 0  |

If you want to accept a larger number of connections than the default 900, make sure that you increase the maximum
number of open connections in the operating system. Usually, the `ulimit` command can help with that.

This value can be estimated by the following calculation:
```
$(ulimit -Sn) - {p2p.max_num_inbound_peers} - {p2p.max_num_outbound_peers} - {number of WAL, DB and other open files}
```

Estimating the number of WAL, DB and other files at `50`, and using the default soft limit of Debian Linux (`1024`):
```
1024 - 40 - 10 - 50 = 924 (~900)
```

Note, that macOS has a default soft limit of `256`. Make sure you calculate this value for the operating system CometBFT
runs on.

### rpc.max_subscription_clients
Maximum number of unique clientIDs that can subscribe to events at the `/subscribe` RPC endpoint.
```toml
max_subscription_clients = 100
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

> 
> If you are using the `/broadcast_tx_commit` RPC endpoint, set this to the estimated maximum number of
> `broadcast_tx_commit` calls per block.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

### rpc.max_subscriptions_per_client
Maximum number of unique queries a given client can subscribe to at the `/subscribe` RPC endpoint.
```toml
max_subscriptions_per_client = 5
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

> If you are using the `/broadcast_tx_commit` RPC endpoint, set this to the estimated maximum number of
> `broadcast_tx_commit` calls per block.
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Using a value larger than `"10s"` will result in increasing the global HTTP write timeout, which applies to all connections
and endpoints. There is an old developer discussion about this [here](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/3435).

> Note: It is generally recommended *not* to use the `broadcast_tx_commit` method in production, and instead prefer `/broadcast_tx_sync`.

### rpc.max_body_bytes
Maximum size of request body, in bytes.
```toml
max_body_bytes = 1000000
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

### rpc.max_header_bytes
Maximum size of request header, in bytes.
```toml
max_header_bytes = 1048576
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

### rpc.tls_cert_file
TLS certificates file path for HTTPS server use.
```toml
tls_cert_file = ""
```

| Value type          | string                                                 |
|:--------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | relative directory path, appended to `$CMTHOME/config` |

> |                     | absolute directory path                                |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|                     | absolute directory path                                |
|                     |                                                        |
```

The default relative path translates to `$CMTHOME/config`. In case `$CMTHOME` is unset, it defaults to
`$HOME/.cometbft/config`.

If the certificate is signed by a certificate authority, the certificate file should be the concatenation of the
server certificate, any intermediate certificates, and the Certificate Authority certificate.

The [rpc.tls_key_file](#rpctls_key_file) property also has to be set with the matching private key.

If this property is not set, the HTTP protocol will be used by the default server

### rpc.tls_key_file
TLS private key file path for HTTPS server use.
```toml
tls_key_file = ""
```

| Value type          | string                                                 |
|:--------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | relative directory path, appended to `$CMTHOME/config` |

> |                     | absolute directory path                                |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|                     | absolute directory path                                |
|                     | `""`                                                   |
```

protocol.

`"nop"` is a "no operation" or disabled mempool, where the ABCI application is responsible for storing, disseminating and
proposing transactions. Note, that it requires empty blocks to be created:
[`consensus.create_empty_blocks = true`](#consensuscreate_empty_blocks) has to be set.

### mempool.recheck
Transaction validity check.
```toml
recheck = true
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `true`  |
|                     | `false` |

Committing a block affects the application state, hence the remaining transactions in the mempool after a block commit
might become invalid. Setting `recheck = true` will go through the remaining transactions and remove invalid ones.

### mempool.broadcast
Broadcast the mempool content (uncommitted transactions) to other nodes.
```toml
broadcast = true
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `true`  |
|                     | `false` |

This ensures that uncommitted transactions have a chance to reach multiple validators and get committed by one of them.

> Setting this to `false` will stop the mempool from relaying transactions to other peers until they are included in a
> block. Only the peer you send the tx to will see it until it is included in a block.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Setting this to `false` will stop the mempool from relaying transactions to other peers.
Validators behind sentry nodes typically set this to `false`,
as their sentry nodes take care of disseminating transactions to the rest of the network.
```

binary. There is no such check in place right now. Configuration and binary versions are interchangeable.

### proxy_app
The TCP or UNIX socket of the ABCI application or the name of an example ABCI application compiled in with the CometBFT
library.
```toml
proxy_app = "tcp://127.0.0.1:26658"
```

| Value type          | string                                                  |
|:--------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | TCP Stream socket (e.g. `"tcp://127.0.0.1:26658"`)      |
|                     | Unix domain socket (e.g. `"unix:///var/run/abci.sock"`) |
|                     | `"kvstore"`                                             |
|                     | `"persistent_kvstore"`                                  |
|                     | `"noop"`                                                |

When the ABCI application is written in a different language than Golang, (for example the
[Nomic binary](https://github.com/nomic-io/nomic) is written in Rust) the application can open a TCP port or create a
UNIX domain socket to communicate with CometBFT, while CometBFT runs as a separate process.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

IP addresses other than `localhost` (IPv4: `127.0.0.1`, IPv6: `::1`) are strongly discouraged. It has not been tested, and it has strong performance and security implications.
```

Monikers do not need to be unique. They are for local administrator use and troubleshooting.

Nodes on the peer-to-peer network are identified by `nodeID@host:port` as discussed in the
[node_key.json](node_key.json.md) section.

### db_backend
The chosen database backend for the node.
```toml
db_backend = "goleveldb"
```

| Value type          | string        | dependencies  | GitHub                                           |
|:--------------------|:--------------|:--------------|:-------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | `"goleveldb"` | pure Golang   | [goleveldb](https://github.com/syndtr/goleveldb) |
|                     | `"cleveldb"`  | requires gcc  | [leveldb](https://github.com/google/leveldb)     |
|                     | `"boltdb"`    | pure Golang   | [bbolt](https://github.com/etcd-io/bbolt)        |
|                     | `"rocksdb"`   | requires gcc  | [grocksdb](https://github.com/linxGnu/grocksdb)  |
|                     | `"badgerdb"`  | pure Golang   | [badger](https://github.com/dgraph-io/badger)    |
|                     | `"pebbledb"`  | pure Golang   | [pebble](https://github.com/cockroachdb/pebble)  |

> During the build process, only the `goleveldb` library is built into the binary.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
During the build process, only the `goleveldb` library is built into the binary by default.
```

from the signing service.

Make sure the port is available on the host machine and firewalls allow the signing service to connect to it.

More information on a supported signing service can be found in the [TMKMS](https://github.com/iqlusioninc/tmkms)
documentation.

### node_key_file
Path to the JSON file containing the private key to use for node authentication in the p2p protocol (more details [here](./node_key.json.md)).
```toml
node_key_file = "config/node_key.json"
```

| Value type          | string                                          |
|:--------------------|:------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | relative directory path, appended to `$CMTHOME` |
|                     | absolute directory path                         |

The default relative path translates to `$CMTHOME/config/node_key.json`. In case `$CMTHOME` is unset, it defaults to
`$HOME/.cometbft/config/node_key.json`.

### abci
The mechanism used to connect to the ABCI application.
````toml
abci = "socket"
````

| Value type          | string     |
|:--------------------|:-----------|
| **Possible values** | `"socket"` |

> |                     | `"grpc"`   |

Reviewer 3: It can also have the empty string `""`, which denotes the application is (or should be) linked together with CometBFT and the local ABCI will be used (ABCI calls become function calls).

> |                     | `"grpc"`   |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|                     | `"grpc"`   |
|                     | `""`   |
```

This mechanism is used when connecting to the ABCI application over the [proxy_app](#proxy_app) socket.

### filter_peers
When connecting to a new peer, filter the connection through an ABCI query to decide, if the connection should be kept.
```toml
filter_peers = false
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `false` |
|                     | `true`  |

When this setting is `true`, the ABCI application has to implement a query that returns `true` or `false` depending on
if the ABCI application wants to keep the connection or drop it.

To filter the peers by remote address, the query `/p2p/filter/addr/(peer address)` has to return `true` or `false`.
Remote addresses have to be fully qualified, for example: `tcp://1.2.3.4:26656`.

> To filter the peers by [node ID](node_key.json.md), the query `/p2p/filter/id/(peer ID)` has to return `true` or `false`

Reviewer 3: I wonder who's using this at present. I've never come across any prod chain (or test chain for what it's worth) using this. I would mark this as candidate for deprecation (but this is out of the scope of this PR -- let me know if you want me to file an issue)

Reviewer 2: Who is this beneficial for us? This only impacts the p2p transport/switch.

> To filter the peers by remote address, the query `/p2p/filter/addr/(peer address)` has to return `true` or `false`.
> Remote addresses have to be fully qualified, for example: `tcp://1.2.3.4:26656`.
> 
> To filter the peers by [node ID](node_key.json.md), the query `/p2p/filter/id/(peer ID)` has to return `true` or `false`
> .

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This feature is likely to be deprecated
```

## RPC Server
These configuration options change the behaviour of the built-in RPC server.

### rpc.laddr
TCP or UNIX socket address for the RPC server to listen on.
```toml

> laddr = "tcp://127.0.0.1:26657"

Reviewer 3: Does it really default to `localhost` (rather than INADDR_ANY) ?

Reviewer 3: Looks like it's the case... now that I think of it, it makes sense to indicate the user it's not safe to expose the RPC server to the public internet.

Maybe a sentence with this info would be helpful here. Up to you.

Reviewer 3: Resolving as this info exists elsewhere in the doc

```toml
max_subscriptions_per_client = 5
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

If you are using the `/broadcast_tx_commit` RPC endpoint, set this to the estimated maximum number of
`broadcast_tx_commit` calls per block.

### rpc.experimental_subscription_buffer_size
Experimental parameter to specify the maximum number of events a node will buffer, per subscription, before returning
an error and closing the subscription.
```toml
experimental_subscription_buffer_size = 200
```

| Value type          | integer   |
|:--------------------|:----------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 100 |

Higher values will accommodate higher event throughput rates (and will use more memory).

### rpc.experimental_websocket_write_buffer_size
Experimental parameter to specify the maximum number of events that can be buffered per WebSocket client.
```toml
experimental_websocket_write_buffer_size = 200
```

| Value type          | integer                                         |
|:--------------------|:------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= rpc.experimental_subscription_buffer_size |

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

If clients cannot read from the WebSocket endpoint fast enough, they will be disconnected, so increasing this parameter
may reduce the chances of them being disconnected (but will cause the node to use more memory).

If set lower than `rpc.experimental_subscription_buffer_size`, connections could be dropped unnecessarily. This value

> should ideally be somewhat higher to accommodate non-subscription-related RPC responses.

Reviewer 3: So, why are both default values the same? (200)

Reviewer 3: Not much can be done in this PR. Resolving

Using a value larger than `"10s"` will result in increasing the global HTTP write timeout, which applies to all connections
and endpoints. There is an old developer discussion about this [here](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/3435).

> Note: It is generally recommended *not* to use the `broadcast_tx_commit` method in production, and instead prefer `/broadcast_tx_sync`.

### rpc.max_body_bytes
Maximum size of request body, in bytes.
```toml
max_body_bytes = 1000000
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

### rpc.max_header_bytes
Maximum size of request header, in bytes.
```toml
max_header_bytes = 1048576
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

### rpc.tls_cert_file
TLS certificates file path for HTTPS server use.
```toml
tls_cert_file = ""
```

| Value type          | string                                                 |
|:--------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | relative directory path, appended to `$CMTHOME/config` |

> |                     | absolute directory path                                |

Reviewer 3: Shall we add the empty string `""` as possible value (since it's the default)

Reviewer 2: Yes, we can add this information to the next paragraph.

The default relative path translates to `$CMTHOME/config`. In case `$CMTHOME` is unset, it defaults to
`$HOME/.cometbft/config`.

If the certificate is signed by a certificate authority, the certificate file should be the concatenation of the
server certificate, any intermediate certificates, and the Certificate Authority certificate.

The [rpc.tls_key_file](#rpctls_key_file) property also has to be set with the matching private key.

If this property is not set, the HTTP protocol will be used by the default server

### rpc.tls_key_file
TLS private key file path for HTTPS server use.
```toml
tls_key_file = ""
```

| Value type          | string                                                 |
|:--------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | relative directory path, appended to `$CMTHOME/config` |

> |                     | absolute directory path                                |

Reviewer 3: empty string `""`?

`$HOME/.cometbft/config`.

The [rpc.tls_cert_file](#rpctls_cert_file) property also has to be set with the matching server certificate.

If this property is not set, the HTTP protocol will be used by the default server

### rpc.pprof_laddr
Profiling data listen address and port. Without protocol prefix.
```toml
pprof_laddr = ""
```

| Value type          | string                       |
|:--------------------|:-----------------------------|
| **Possible values** | IP:port (`"127.0.0.1:6060"`) |
|                     | :port (`":6060"`)            |
|                     | `""`                         |

HTTP is always assumed as the protocol.

See the Golang [profiling](https://golang.org/pkg/net/http/pprof) documentation for more information.

## gRPC Server
These configuration options change the behaviour of the built-in gRPC server.

Each gRPC service can be turned on/off, and in some cases configured, individually.
If the gRPC server is not enabled, all individual services' configurations are ignored.

The gRPC server is exposed without any kind of security control or authentication. Do NOT expose this server

> on the public Internet without appropriate precautions. Make sure it is secured, authenticated, load-balanced, etc.

Reviewer 3: A similar warning should appear at the beginning of the `RPC` section

If not specified, the gRPC privileged endpoints will be disabled.

### grpc.privileged.pruning_service
Configuration specifically for the gRPC pruning service, which is considered a privileged service.
```toml
enabled = false
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `false` |
|                     | `true`  |

Only controls whether the pruning service is accessible via the gRPC API - not whether a previously set pruning service
retain height is honored by the node. See the [storage.pruning](#storagepruninginterval) section for control over pruning.

If [`grpc.laddr`](#grpcladdr) is empty, this setting is ignored and the service is not enabled.

## Peer-to-peer

These configuration options change the behaviour of the peer-to-peer protocol.

### p2p.laddr

TCP socket address for the P2P service to listen on and accept connections.
```toml
laddr = "tcp://0.0.0.0:26656"
```

| Value type          | string                                            |
|:--------------------|:--------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | TCP Stream socket (e.g. `"tcp://127.0.0.1:26657"`)     |

### p2p.external_address

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

TCP address that peers should use in order to connect to the node.
This is the address that the node advertises to peers.
If not set, the [`p2p.laddr`](#p2pladdr) is advertised.

Useful when the node is running on a non-routable address or when the
node does not have the capabilities to figure out its IP public address.
For example, this is useful when running from a cloud service (e.g, AWS, Digital Ocean).
In these scenarios, the public or external address of the node should be set to
`p2p.external_address`, while the private or internal address should be used as

> the listen address ([`p2p.laddr`](#p2pladdr)).

Reviewer 3: Unless you're using some NAT hole poking (which is not mentioned in this text), if you bind your node to the internal or private address, remote node won't be able to reach you.
Probably what the test should rather say is that `p2p.laddr` should be bound to the `0.0.0.0` address (i.e., INADDR_ANY), as is the default BTW.

Reviewer 2: The question here is not the listening address, but the authentication address.

```toml
external_address = ""
```

| Value type          | string                      |
|:--------------------|:----------------------------|
| **Possible values** | IP:port (`"1.2.3.4:26656"`) |
|                     | `""`                        |

The port has to point to the node's P2P port.

> Example with a node on a non-routable network:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Example with a node on a NATed non-routable network:
```

- Node has local or private IP address `10.10.10.10` and uses port `10000` for
  P2P communication: set this address as the [listen address](#p2pladdr) (`p2p.laddr`).
- The network gateway has the public IP `1.2.3.4` and we want to use publicly
  open port `26656` on the IP address. In this case, a redirection has to be

>   set up from `1.2.3.4:26656` to `10.10.10.10:1000`;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  set up from `1.2.3.4:26656` to `10.10.10.10:1000` in your router implementing NAT;
```

potential peers and information regarding connected peers) to the address book file.
If the node is started with a non-empty address book file, it may not need to
rely on potential peers provided by [seed nodes](#p2pseeds).

### p2p.addr_book_strict

Strict address routability rules disallow non-routable IP addresses in the address book. When `false`, private network
IP addresses are enabled to be stored in the address book and dialed.

```toml
addr_book_strict = true
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `true`  |
|                     | `false` |

Set it to `false` for testing on private network. Most production nodes can keep it at `true`.

### p2p.max_num_inbound_peers

Maximum number of inbound peers,
that is, peers from which the node accepts connections.

```toml
max_num_inbound_peers = 40
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

The [`p2p.max_num_inbound_peers`](#p2pmax_num_inbound_peers) and
[`p2p.max_num_outbound_peers`](#p2pmax_num_outbound_peers) values
work together to define how many P2P connections the node will
maintain at maximum capacity.

> Nodes configured as [unconditional peers](#p2punconditional_peer_ids) do not count towards the

Reviewer 3: what about persistent peers?

inbound and outbound setting only distinguishes the initial setup of the connection: outbound connections are initiated
by the node while inbound connections are initiated by a remote party.

Nodes on non-routable networks have to set their gateway to port-forward the P2P port for inbound connections to reach
the node. Outbound connections can only be initiated to peers that have addresses accessible from the Internet (using NAT or other methods).
Refer to the [p2p.external_address](#p2pexternal_address) configuration for details.

### p2p.unconditional_peer_ids

List of node IDs that are allowed to connect to the node even when connection limits are exceeded.

```toml
unconditional_peer_ids = ""
```

| Value type          | string (comma-separated)         |
|:--------------------|:---------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | comma-separated list of node IDs |
|                     | `""`                             |

If a peer listed in this property establishes a connection to the node, it will be accepted even if the
configured [`p2p.max_num_inbound_peers`](#p2pmax_num_inbound_peers) limit was reached.
Peers on this list also do not count towards the

> configured [`p2p.max_num_outbound_peers`](#p2pmax_num_outbound_peers) limit.

Reviewer 3: Now I'm confused: unconditional peers are not mentioned in the `p2p.max_num_outbound_peers` section (only persistent peers are mentioned there)

Reviewer 3: Can be dealt with later. Resolving

While this might reduce latency, it may degrade throughput as batching
outstanding messages is essentially disabled.

### p2p.max_packet_msg_payload_size

Maximum size of a packet payload, in bytes.

```toml
max_packet_msg_payload_size = 1024
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt; 0  |

Messages exchanged via P2P connections are split into packets.
Packets contain some metadata and message data (payload).
The value configures the maximum size in bytes of the payload
included in a packet.

### p2p.send_rate

Rate at which packets can be sent, in bytes/second.

```toml
send_rate = 5120000
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt; 0  |

The value represents the amount of packet bytes that can be sent per second
by each P2P connection.

### p2p.recv_rate

Rate at which packets can be received, in bytes/second.

```toml
recv_rate = 5120000
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt; 0  |

The value represents the amount of packet bytes that can be received per second
by each P2P connection.

### p2p.pex

> 

Reviewer 3: default value?

appropriate fraction of the time to connect.

Setting the value to `"0s"` disables the timeout.

## Mempool
Mempool allows gathering and broadcasting uncommitted transactions among nodes.

The **mempool** is storage for uncommitted transactions; the **mempool cache** is internal storage within the
mempool for seen transactions. The mempool cache provides a list of transactions already received to filter out
incoming duplicate transactions and prevent duplicate full transaction validations.

### mempool.type
The type of mempool this node will use.
```toml
type = "flood"
```

| Value type          | string    |
|:--------------------|:----------|
| **Possible values** | `"flood"` |
|                     | `"nop"`   |

`"flood"` is the original mempool implemented for CometBFT. It is a concurrent linked list with flooding gossip
protocol.

`"nop"` is a "no operation" or disabled mempool, where the ABCI application is responsible for storing, disseminating and
proposing transactions. Note, that it requires empty blocks to be created:
[`consensus.create_empty_blocks = true`](#consensuscreate_empty_blocks) has to be set.

### mempool.recheck

> Transaction validity check.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Validity check of transactions already in the mempool when a block is finalized.
```

```toml
recheck = true
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `true`  |
|                     | `false` |

Committing a block affects the application state, hence the remaining transactions in the mempool after a block commit
might become invalid. Setting `recheck = true` will go through the remaining transactions and remove invalid ones.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

If you application may remove transactions in its `PrepareProposal` handler,
you probably need to set this configuration to `true` to avoid possible leaks in your mempool
(transactions staying in the mempool until the node is next restarted).
```

### mempool.broadcast
Broadcast the mempool content (uncommitted transactions) to other nodes.
```toml
broadcast = true
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `true`  |
|                     | `false` |

This ensures that uncommitted transactions have a chance to reach multiple validators and get committed by one of them.

Setting this to `false` will stop the mempool from relaying transactions to other peers until they are included in a
block. Only the peer you send the tx to will see it until it is included in a block.

> ### mempool.wal_dir

Reviewer 3: There seems to be an important bug here... and looks like long standing (I checked on `main` and `v0.34.x` and it exists in both).

The bug is that this config is ignored altogether (!!!). There's _always_ a WAL (i.e., it can't be disabled) in `$CMTHOME/data/cs.wal`.

Reviewer 2: Indeed, no indication that the mempool writes anything to disk.

Actually, `WalDir` and `WalPath` are not not used under `mempool/` or `node/`.

Reviewer 2: We should deprecate and remove.

Reviewer 3: OK, adapted the text to look like `statesync.temp_dir`

Mempool write-ahead log folder path.
```toml
wal_dir = ""
```

| Value type          | string                                          |
|:--------------------|:------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | relative directory path, appended to `$CMTHOME` |
|                     | absolute directory path                         |
|                     | `""`                                            |

In case `$CMTHOME` is unset, it defaults to `$HOME/.cometbft`.

Configures the location of the Write Ahead Log (WAL) for the mempool. `""`  disables the WAL.

### mempool.size
Maximum number of transactions in the mempool.
```toml
size = 5000
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

If the mempool is full, incoming transactions are dropped.

The value `0` is undefined.

### mempool.max_txs_bytes
The maximum size of all transactions accepted in the mempool.
```toml

> max_txs_bytes = 1073741824

Reviewer 3: Hadn't we decided to reduce this to N times the default block size (N being around 10?)

Reviewer 3: Let's open an issue on this, and dealt with this text there

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/issues/2756

```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

This is the raw, total transaction size. Given 1MB transactions and a 5MB maximum transaction size, mempool will only
accept five transactions.

> The default value is 1 Gibibytes (2^30 bytes).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The default value is 1 Gibibyte (2^30 bytes).
```

### mempool.cache_size

> Mempool internal cache size for invalid transactions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Mempool internal cache size for already seen transactions.
```

```toml
cache_size = 10000
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

> The mempool cache is an internal store for invalid transactions. Storing invalid transactions help in filtering incoming

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The mempool cache is an internal store for transactions that the local node has already seen. Storing these transactions help in filtering incoming duplicate
```

> transactions: we can compare incoming transactions to known invalid transactions and filter them out without going

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
transactions: we can compare incoming transactions to already seen transactions and filter them out without going
```

through the process of validating the incoming transaction.

### mempool.keep-invalid-txs-in-cache
Invalid transactions might become valid in the future, hence they are regularly removed from the mempool cache of
invalid transactions. Turning this setting on will keep them in the list of invalid transactions forever.
```toml
keep-invalid-txs-in-cache = false
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `false` |
|                     | `true`  |

Invalid transactions might become valid at a later time. The mempool cache clears invalid transactions regularly so the
transactions can be re-validated.

> If this setting is set to `true`, the mempool cache will NOT remove the invalid transactions. It is useful in cases when

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If this setting is set to `true`, the mempool cache will add incoming transactions even if they are invalid. It is useful in cases when
```

> invalidated transactions can never become valid again.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
invalidat transactions can never become valid again.
```

This setting can be used by operators to lower the impact of some spam transactions: when a large number of duplicate
spam transactions are noted on the network, temporarily turning this setting to `true` will filter out the duplicates
quicker than validating each transaction one-by-one. It will also filter out transactions that are supposed to become

> valid at a later date, so it is not advised to keep this `true` for a long time on regular networks as it can lead to
> valid transactions failing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
valid at a later date.
```
I strongly disagree with the sentence I'm proposing to remove here. Unless there is a strong reason, this value should always be set to `true`, to avoid easily spamming a node.
The value `false` is ill-defined in this setting, let me know if you want further details on why. I have proposed to remove this setting in the past.

### mempool.max_tx_bytes
Maximum size of a single transaction accepted into the mempool.
```toml
max_tx_bytes = 1048576
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

> This is the maximum size of a transaction allowed to be transmitted over the network.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is the maximum size of a transaction allowed to be accepted into the mempool.
```

### mempool.experimental_max_gossip_connections_to_persistent_peers

> > EXPERIMENTAL parameter!

Reviewer 3: You may want to add this label to the experimental RPC params above

Reviewer 3: Done

in the [`p2p.persistent_peers`](#p2ppersistent_peers) list.
```toml
experimental_max_gossip_connections_to_non_persistent_peers = 0
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

When set to `0`, the mempool is broadcasting to all the nodes. If the number is above `0`, the number of nodes that get
broadcasts will be limited to this setting.

Unconditional peers and peers listed in the [`p2p.persistent_peers`](#p2ppersistent_peers) list are not affected by
this parameter.

See
[`mempool.experimental_max_gossip_connections_to_persistent_peers`](#mempoolexperimental_max_gossip_connections_to_persistent_peers)
to limit broadcasts to persistent peer nodes.

For non-persistent peers, if enabled, a value of 10 is recommended based on experimental performance results using the
default P2P configuration.

## State synchronization
State sync rapidly bootstraps a new node by discovering, fetching, and restoring a state machine snapshot from peers
instead of fetching and replaying historical blocks. It requires some peers in the network to take and serve state

> machine snapshots. State sync is not attempted if the node has any local state (LastBlockHeight > 0).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
machine snapshots. State sync is not attempted if the starting node has any local state (i.e., it is recovering).
```

|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

`0` is only allowed when state synchronization is disabled.

### statesync.trust_hash
Header hash obtained from a trusted source.
```toml
trust_hash = ""
```

| Value type          | string             |
|:--------------------|:-------------------|
| **Possible values** | hex-encoded number |
|                     | ""                 |

`""` is only allowed when state synchronization is disabled.

This is the header hash value obtained from the trusted source at height
[statesync.trust_height](#statesynctrust_height).

### statesync.trust_period
The period during which validators can be trusted.
```toml
trust_period = "168h0m0s"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0s"`      |

For Cosmos SDK-based chains, `statesync.trust_period` should usually be about 2/3rd of the unbonding period
(about 2 weeks) during which they can be financially punished (slashed) for misbehavior.

### statesync.discovery_time
Time to spend discovering snapshots before initiating a restore.
```toml
discovery_time = "15s"
```

> <!--- What happens when this time expires? --->

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If `discovery_time` is &gt; 0 and  &lt; 5 seconds, its value will be overridden to 5 seconds. 

If `discovery_time` is zero, the node will not wait for replies once it has broadcast the "snapshot request" message to its peers. If no snapshot data is received, state sync will fail without retrying.

If `discovery_time` is &gt;= 5 seconds, the node will broadcast the "snapshot request" message to its peers and then wait for `discovery_time`. If no snapshot data has been received after that period, the node will retry: it will broadcast the "snapshot request" message again and wait for `discovery_time`, and so on.
```

### statesync.temp_dir
Temporary directory for state sync snapshot chunks.
```toml
temp_dir = ""
```

| Value type          | string                  |
|:--------------------|:------------------------|
| **Possible values** | undefined               |

> This value is unused by CometBFT. It was not hooked up to the state sync reactor.

Reviewer 3: I propose to word the `mempool.wal_dir` section the same as this one, while we decide what to do with the code (either remove `mempool.wal_dir` from the config, of wire it to the actual logic).

Reviewer 3: Done.

The codebase will always revert to `/tmp/<random_name>` for state snapshot chunks. Make sure you have enough space on
your drive that holds `/tmp`.

### statesync.chunk_request_timeout
The timeout duration before re-requesting a chunk, possibly from a different peer.
```toml
chunk_request_timeout = "10s"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"5s"`      |

If a smaller duration is set when state syncing is enabled, an error message is raised.

### statesync.chunk_fetchers
The number of concurrent chunk fetchers to run.

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

`0` is only allowed when state synchronization is disabled.

## Block synchronization
Block synchronization configuration is limited to defining a version of block synchronization to use.

### blocksync.version
Block Sync version to use.
```toml
version = "v0"
```

| Value type          | string  |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `"v0"`  |

> All other versions are deprecated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All other versions are deprecated. Further versions may be added in future releases.
```

## Consensus

Consensus parameters define how the consensus protocol should behave.

### consensus.wal_file

Location of the consensus Write-Ahead Log (WAL) file.

```toml
wal_file = "data/cs.wal/wal"
```

| Value type          | string                                          |
|:--------------------|:------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | relative directory path, appended to `$CMTHOME` |
|                     | absolute directory path                         |

The default relative path translates to `$CMTHOME/data/cs.wal/wal`. In case `$CMTHOME` is unset, it defaults to
`$HOME/.cometbft/data/cs.wal/wal`.

The consensus WAL stores all consensus messages received and broadcast by a
node, as well as some important consensus events (e.g., new height and new round step).

> The goal of this log is to enable a node that crashes and late recovers

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The goal of this log is to enable a node that crashes and later recovers
```

Setting `timeout_propose` to `0s` means that the validator does not wait at all
for the proposal block and always prevotes nil.
This has obvious liveness implications since this validator will never prevote
for proposed blocks.

### consensus.timeout_propose_delta

How much `timeout_propose` increases with each round.

```toml
timeout_propose_delta = "500ms"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0ms"`     |

Consensus timeouts are adaptive.
This means that when a round of consensus fails to commit a block, the next
round of consensus will adopt increased timeout durations.
Timeouts increase linearly over rounds, so that the `timeout_propose` adopted
in round `r` is `timeout_propose + r * timeout_propose_delta`.

### consensus.timeout_prevote

How long a node waits, after receiving +2/3 conflicting prevotes, before pre-committing nil.

```toml
timeout_prevote = "1s"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0s"`      |

A validator that receives +2/3 prevotes for a block, precommits that block.

> If it receives +2/3 prevotes for nil, it precommits nil.

Reviewer 3: @cason shouldn't this read +1/3 ?

Reviewer 2: Why? It is true that it precommits nil if no value reaches 2/3+ prevotes. But this is described in the next sentence.

Reviewer 2: I mean, this could be an optimization, but the code isn't like that.

Reviewer 3: I see. That was my question, which is now answered (--> it's a possible optimization). Resolving.

Consensus timeouts are adaptive.
This means that when a round of consensus fails to commit a block, the next
round of consensus will adopt increased timeout durations.
Timeouts increase linearly over rounds, so that the `timeout_precommit` adopted
in round `r` is `timeout_precommit + r * timeout_precommit_delta`.

### consensus.timeout_commit

How long a node waits after committing a block, before starting on the next height.

```toml
timeout_commit = "1s"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0s"`      |

The `timeout_commit` represents the minimum interval between the commit of a
block until the start of the next height of consensus.
It gives the node a chance to gather additional precommits for the committed
block, more than the mandatory +2/3 precommits required to commit a block.
The more precommits are gathered for a block, the greater are the safety
guarantees and the easier is to detect misbehaving validators.

The `timeout_commit` is not a required component of the consensus algorithm,
meaning that there are no liveness implications if it is set to `0s`.

> But it does have implications in the way the application rewards validators.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
But it may have implications in the way the application rewards validators.
```

### consensus.create_empty_blocks

Propose empty blocks if the validator's mempool does not have any transaction.

```toml
create_empty_blocks = true
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `true`  |
|                     | `false` |

When set to `true`, empty blocks are produced and proposed to indicate that the
chain is still operative.
When set to `false`, blocks are not produced or proposed while there are no
transactions in the validator's mempool.

Notice that empty blocks are still proposed whenever the application hash
(`app_hash`) has been updated.

This is more relevant for networks with a low volume number of transactions.

### consensus.create_empty_blocks_interval

How long a validator should wait before proposing an empty block.

```toml
create_empty_blocks_interval = "0s"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0s"`      |

If there are no transactions in the validator's mempool, the validator
waits for `create_empty_blocks_interval` before producing and proposing an

> empty block (with no transactions).

Reviewer 3: Does it also wait `create_empty_blocks_interval` if there is a change in `app_hash`?

Reviewer 2: Nope.

Reviewer 2: But this is mentioned in the second paragraph below.

Reviewer 3: Addressed

If set to `false` ABCI responses are maintained, if set to `true` ABCI responses will be pruned.

ABCI responses are required for the `/block_results` RPC queries.

### storage.experimental_db_key_layout

The representation of keys in the database. The current representation of keys in Comet's stores is considered to be `v1`.

Users can experiment with a different layout by setting this field to `v2`. Note that this is an experimental feature
and switching back from `v2` to `v1` is not supported by CometBFT.

If the database was initially created with `v1`, it is necessary to migrate the DB before switching to `v2`. The migration
is not done automatically.

```toml
experimental_db_key_layout = 'v1'
```

| Value type          | string |
|:--------------------|:-------|
| **Possible values** | `v1`   |
|                     | `v2`   |

- `v1` - The legacy layout existing in Comet prior to v1.
- `v2` - Order preserving representation ordering entries by height.

If not specified, the default value `v1` will be used.

### storage.compact

If set to true, CometBFT will force compaction to happen for databases that support this feature and save on storage space.

> Setting this to true is most benefits when used in combination with pruning as it will physically delete the entries marked for deletion.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Setting this to true is most beneficial when used in combination with pruning as it will physically delete the entries marked for deletion.
```

```toml
compact = false
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `false` |
|                     | `true`  |

`false` is the default value (forcing compaction is disabled).

### storage.compaction_interval

To avoid forcing compaction every time, this parameter instructs CometBFT to wait the given amount of blocks to be
pruned before triggering compaction.

It should be tuned depending on the number of items. If your retain height is 1 block, it is too much of an overhead

> to try compaction every block. But it should also not be a very large multiple of your retain height as it might occur

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to try compaction every block. But it should also not be a very large multiple of your retain height as it might incur
```

one. If the data companion has already set a block results retain height, this is ignored.
```toml
initial_block_results_retain_height = 0
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

### storage.pruning.data_companion.genesis_hash
Hash of the Genesis file, passed to CometBFT via the command line.
```toml
genesis_hash = ""
```

| Value type          | string             |
|:--------------------|:-------------------|
| **Possible values** | hex-encoded number |
|                     | `""`               |

If this hash mismatches the hash that CometBFT computes on the genesis file, the node is not able to boot.

## Transaction indexer
Transaction indexer settings.

The application will set which txs to index.
In some cases, a node operator will be able to decide which txs to index based on the configuration set in the application.

### tx_index.indexer
What indexer to use for transactions.
```toml
indexer = "kv"
```

| Value type          | string   |
|:--------------------|:---------|
| **Possible values** | `"kv"`   |
|                     | `"null"` |
|                     | `"psql"` |

> `"null"` indexer indexes nothing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`"null"` indexer disables indexing.
```

```toml
psql-conn = ""
```

| Value type          | string                                                       |
|:--------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | `"postgresql://<user>:<password>@<host>:<port>/<db>?<opts>"` |
|                     | `""`                                                         |

## Prometheus Instrumentation
An extensive amount of Prometheus metrics are built into CometBFT.

### instrumentation.prometheus
Enable or disable presenting the Prometheus metrics at an endpoint.
```toml
prometheus = false
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `false` |
|                     | `true`  |

When enabled, metrics are served under the `/metrics` endpoint on the
[instrumentation.prometheus_listen_addr](#instrumentationprometheus_listen_addr) address.

### instrumentation.prometheus_listen_addr
Address to listen for Prometheus collector(s) connections.
```toml
prometheus_listen_addr = ":26660"
```

| Value type          | string                                |
|:--------------------|:--------------------------------------|

> | **Possible values** | Network address (`"127.0.0.1:26657"`) |

Reviewer 3: It says "Network address" here, but its default value doesn't have an IP address

number of open connections in the operating system. Usually, the `ulimit` command can help with that.

This value can be estimated by the following calculation:
```
$(ulimit -Sn) - {p2p.max_num_inbound_peers} - {p2p.max_num_outbound_peers} - {number of WAL, DB and other open files}
```

Estimating the number of WAL, DB and other files at `50`, and using the default soft limit of Debian Linux (`1024`):
```
1024 - 40 - 10 - 50 = 924 (~900)
```

Note, that macOS has a default soft limit of `256`. Make sure you calculate this value for the operating system CometBFT
runs on.

### rpc.max_subscription_clients
Maximum number of unique clientIDs that can subscribe to events at the `/subscribe` RPC endpoint.
```toml
max_subscription_clients = 100
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

### rpc.max_subscriptions_per_client
Maximum number of unique queries a given client can subscribe to at the `/subscribe` RPC endpoint.
```toml
max_subscriptions_per_client = 5
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

> ### rpc.experimental_subscription_buffer_size

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### rpc.experimental_subscription_buffer_size
> EXPERIMENTAL parameter!

```

Experimental parameter to specify the maximum number of events a node will buffer, per subscription, before returning
an error and closing the subscription.
```toml
experimental_subscription_buffer_size = 200
```

| Value type          | integer   |
|:--------------------|:----------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 100 |

Higher values will accommodate higher event throughput rates (and will use more memory).

### rpc.experimental_websocket_write_buffer_size

> Experimental parameter to specify the maximum number of events that can be buffered per WebSocket client.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> EXPERIMENTAL parameter!

Experimental parameter to specify the maximum number of events that can be buffered per WebSocket client.
```

```toml
experimental_websocket_write_buffer_size = 200
```

| Value type          | integer                                         |
|:--------------------|:------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= rpc.experimental_subscription_buffer_size |

If clients cannot read from the WebSocket endpoint fast enough, they will be disconnected, so increasing this parameter
may reduce the chances of them being disconnected (but will cause the node to use more memory).

If set lower than `rpc.experimental_subscription_buffer_size`, connections could be dropped unnecessarily. This value
should ideally be somewhat higher to accommodate non-subscription-related RPC responses.

### rpc.experimental_close_on_slow_client

> Close the WebSocket client in case it cannot read events fast enough. Allows greater predictability in subscription

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> EXPERIMENTAL parameter!

Close the WebSocket client in case it cannot read events fast enough. Allows greater predictability in subscription
```

### mempool.broadcast
Broadcast the mempool content (uncommitted transactions) to other nodes.
```toml
broadcast = true
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `true`  |
|                     | `false` |

This ensures that uncommitted transactions have a chance to reach multiple validators and get committed by one of them.

Setting this to `false` will stop the mempool from relaying transactions to other peers.
Validators behind sentry nodes typically set this to `false`,
as their sentry nodes take care of disseminating transactions to the rest of the network.

### mempool.wal_dir
Mempool write-ahead log folder path.
```toml
wal_dir = ""
```

| Value type          | string                                          |
|:--------------------|:------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | relative directory path, appended to `$CMTHOME` |
|                     | absolute directory path                         |
|                     | `""`                                            |

In case `$CMTHOME` is unset, it defaults to `$HOME/.cometbft`.

> Configures the location of the Write Ahead Log (WAL) for the mempool. `""`  disables the WAL.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This value is unused by CometBFT. It was not hooked up to the mempool reactor.

The mempool implementation does not persist any transaction data to disk (unlike evidence).
```

| **Possible values** | `true`  |
|                     | `false` |

When set to `true`, empty blocks are produced and proposed to indicate that the
chain is still operative.
When set to `false`, blocks are not produced or proposed while there are no
transactions in the validator's mempool.

Notice that empty blocks are still proposed whenever the application hash
(`app_hash`) has been updated.

This is more relevant for networks with a low volume number of transactions.

### consensus.create_empty_blocks_interval

How long a validator should wait before proposing an empty block.

```toml
create_empty_blocks_interval = "0s"
```

| Value type          | string (duration) |
|:--------------------|:------------------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= `"0s"`      |

If there are no transactions in the validator's mempool, the validator
waits for `create_empty_blocks_interval` before producing and proposing an
empty block (with no transactions).

If [`create_empty_blocks`](#createemptyblocks) is set to `false` and
`create_empty_blocks_interval` is set to `0s`, the validator will wait
indefinitely until a transaction is available in its mempool,
to then produce and propose a block.

> Notice that empty blocks are still proposed whenever the application hash

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Notice that empty blocks are still proposed without waiting for `create_empty_blocks_interval`
whenever the application hash
```

|:--------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | `"postgresql://<user>:<password>@<host>:<port>/<db>?<opts>"` |
|                     | `""`                                                         |

## Prometheus Instrumentation
An extensive amount of Prometheus metrics are built into CometBFT.

### instrumentation.prometheus
Enable or disable presenting the Prometheus metrics at an endpoint.
```toml
prometheus = false
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `false` |
|                     | `true`  |

When enabled, metrics are served under the `/metrics` endpoint on the
[instrumentation.prometheus_listen_addr](#instrumentationprometheus_listen_addr) address.

### instrumentation.prometheus_listen_addr
Address to listen for Prometheus collector(s) connections.
```toml
prometheus_listen_addr = ":26660"
```

| Value type          | string                                |
|:--------------------|:--------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | Network address (`"127.0.0.1:26657"`) |

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

If the IP address is omitted (see e.g. the default value) then the listening socket is bound to INADDR_ANY (`0.0.0.0`).

```

| **Possible values** | &gt;= rpc.experimental_subscription_buffer_size |

If clients cannot read from the WebSocket endpoint fast enough, they will be disconnected, so increasing this parameter
may reduce the chances of them being disconnected (but will cause the node to use more memory).

If set lower than `rpc.experimental_subscription_buffer_size`, connections could be dropped unnecessarily. This value
should ideally be somewhat higher to accommodate non-subscription-related RPC responses.

### rpc.experimental_close_on_slow_client
Close the WebSocket client in case it cannot read events fast enough. Allows greater predictability in subscription
behaviour.
```toml
experimental_close_on_slow_client = false
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `false` |
|                     | `true`  |

The default behaviour for WebSocket clients is to silently drop events, if they cannot read them fast enough. This does
not cause an error and creates unpredictability.
Enabling this setting creates a predictable outcome by closing the WebSocket connection in case it cannot read events
fast enough.

> ### rpc.timeout_broadcast_tx_commit

Reviewer 2: I would warn users to not use this broadcast method in production networks. As the implementation is _super_ inefficient.

Reviewer 7: ad993d5f2

If not specified, the gRPC privileged endpoints will be disabled.

### grpc.privileged.pruning_service
Configuration specifically for the gRPC pruning service, which is considered a privileged service.
```toml
enabled = false
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `false` |
|                     | `true`  |

Only controls whether the pruning service is accessible via the gRPC API - not whether a previously set pruning service
retain height is honored by the node. See the [storage.pruning](#storagepruninginterval) section for control over pruning.

If [`grpc.laddr`](#grpcladdr) is empty, this setting is ignored and the service is not enabled.

## Peer-to-peer
These configuration options change the behaviour of the peer-to-peer protocol.

### p2p.laddr
TCP socket address for the P2P service to listen on.
```toml
laddr = "tcp://0.0.0.0:26656"
```

| Value type          | string                                            |
|:--------------------|:--------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | TCP Stream socket (`"tcp://127.0.0.1:26657"`)     |

### p2p.external_address

> TCP address to use as identification with peers. Useful when the node is running on a non-routable address or when the

Reviewer 2: This is particularly useful when running in AWS or other cloud services. The public/external IP of the node should be set here, while the private/internal address should be used in the `laddr`.

Reviewer 7: 5d23e7c1a

node does not have the capabilities to figure out its IP address.
```toml
external_address = ""
```

| Value type          | string                      |
|:--------------------|:----------------------------|
| **Possible values** | IP:port (`"1.2.3.4:26656"`) |
|                     | `""`                        |

The port has to point to the node's P2P port.

Example with a node on a non-routable network:
- Node has local IP address `10.10.10.10` and uses port `10000` for P2P communication, set in [`p2p.laddr`](#p2pladdr).
- The network gateway has the public IP `1.2.3.4` and we want to use publicly open port `26656` on the IP address.
- A redirection has to be set up from `1.2.3.4:26656` to `10.10.10.10:1000`
- The `external_address` has to be set to `1.2.3.4:26656`.

> ### p2p.seeds

Reviewer 2: Maybe this is too much detail, but the seed node is actually the last resource of addresses for a node. Namely, when the node has no address available to dial, it asks the seed node for addresses.

In this way, if there are configured persistent peers or the address book is not empty, the seed node is not really necessary. Maybe this deserves a manual regarding node discovery and connectivity.

Comma-separated list of seed nodes that the node will try to connect.
```toml
seeds = ""
```

| Value type                        | string (comma-separated list)           |
|:----------------------------------|:----------------------------------------|
| **Possible values within commas** | nodeID@IP:port (`"abcd@1.2.3.4:26656"`) |
|                                   | `""`                                    |

> Seed nodes will transmit a P2P address book for the node and then disconnect. No blocks or consensus communication takes

Reviewer 2: The second part here, unfortunately, is not true.

Reviewer 7: You mean that seed nodes are used for mempool/consensus message gossip?

place.

Example:
```toml
seeds = "abcd@1.2.3.4:26656,deadbeef@5.6.7.8:10000"
```

> ### p2p.persistent_peers

Reviewer 2: Also in the discovery mechanism, we will ask persistent peers for addresses. If they provide us good address, we don't need to ask seed nodes.

Comma-separated list of nodes to keep persistent connections to.
```toml
persistent_peers = ""
```

| Value type                        | string (comma-separated list)           |
|:----------------------------------|:----------------------------------------|
| **Possible values within commas** | nodeID@IP:port (`"abcd@1.2.3.4:26656"`) |
|                                   | `""`                                    |

> Persistent peers do not count toward [`p2p.max_num_inbound_peers`](#p2pmax_num_inbound_peers) or

Reviewer 2: This has been a subject of discussion, see: https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/issues/1304

[`p2p.max_num_outbound_peers`](#p2pmax_num_outbound_peers).

Example:
```toml
persistent_peers = "fedcba@11.22.33.44:26656,beefdead@55.66.77.88:20000"
```

> ### p2p.addr_book_file

Reviewer 2: Here we maybe can inform that the "in-memory" address book is periodically persisted to disk. Namely, the address book should not be empty when the node restarts.

Again in the discovery mechanism, we are first considering addresses in this file, not dialing seeds if it has good addresses.

Path to the address book file.
```toml
addr_book_file = "config/addrbook.json"
```

| Value type          | string                                                      |
|:--------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | relative directory path, appended to `$CMTHOME` |
|                     | absolute directory path                         |

The default relative path translates to `$CMTHOME/config/addrbook.json`. In case `$CMTHOME` is unset, it defaults to
`$HOME/.cometbft/config/addrbook.json`.

### p2p.addr_book_strict
Strict address routability rules disallow non-routable IP addresses in the address book. When `false`, private network

> IP addresses are enabled to be stored in the address book.

Reviewer 2: To be stored and dialed.

```toml
addr_book_strict = true
```

| Value type          | boolean |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | `true`  |
|                     | `false` |

Set it to `false` for testing on private network. Most production nodes can keep it at `true`.

> ### p2p.max_num_inbound_peers

Reviewer 2: Maybe is missing in this section the explanation of this parameter itself: it is the maximum number of connections accepted by a node, while been started by peers. This should be seen as in a "slot" mode. Once an inbound connection is dropped, a new one can be added in "its place".

Maximum number of inbound peers.
```toml
max_num_inbound_peers = 40
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

The [`p2p.max_num_inbound_peers`](#p2pmax_num_inbound_peers) and
[`p2p.max_num_outbound_peers`](#p2pmax_num_outbound_peers) values together define how many P2P connections the node will
maintain at maximum capacity, not including list of nodes in the [`p2p.persistent_peers`](#p2ppersistent_peers) setting.

The connections are bidirectional, so any connection can send or receive blocks and other data. The separation into
inbound and outbound setting only distinguishes the initial setup of the connection: outbound connections are initiated
by the node while inbound connections are initiated by a remote party.

Nodes on non-routable networks have to set their gateway to port-forward the P2P port for inbound connections to reach
the node. Outbound connections can be initiated as long as the node has generic Internet access. (Using NAT or methods.)

> ### p2p.max_num_outbound_peers

Reviewer 2: Again on the definition of behavior. The node will try to establish the configured number of outbound peers. While it didn't get this number, it will continuously (although periodically, every 30s) trying to establish connections. So the name maximum maybe is not good. It is more a target.

Maximum number of outbound peers.
```toml
max_num_outbound_peers = 10
```

| Value type          | integer |
|:--------------------|:--------|
| **Possible values** | &gt;= 0 |

The [`p2p.max_num_inbound_peers`](#p2pmax_num_inbound_peers) and
[`p2p.max_num_outbound_peers`](#p2pmax_num_outbound_peers) values together define how many P2P connections the node will
maintain at maximum capacity, not including list of nodes in the [`p2p.persistent_peers`](#p2ppersistent_peers) setting.

The connections are bidirectional, so any connection can send or receive blocks and other data. The separation into
inbound and outbound setting only distinguishes the initial setup of the connection: outbound connections are initiated
by the node while inbound connections are initiated by a remote party.

Nodes on non-routable networks have to set their gateway to port-forward the P2P port for inbound connections to reach
the node. Outbound connections can be initiated as long as the node has generic Internet access. (Using NAT or methods.)

### p2p.unconditional_peer_ids

> List of node IDs, to which a connection will be (re)established ignoring any existing limits.

Reviewer 2: Not really like that.

We maintain at most `max_num_inbound_peers` at time. If a new connection arrives from a peer set as unconditional, we don't check whether this limited has been exceeded. Plus, unconditional peers does not count towards the number of inbound or outbound peers.

We do not connect to unconditional peers, this is for persistent peers. But we never reject a connection from them.

Author: Yes, that note is complete gibberish. It was copied from the original config.toml comment. Lemme rewrite it.
```suggestion
List of node IDs, that are allowed to connect to the node even when connection limits are exceeded.
```

```toml
unconditional_peer_ids = ""
```

| Value type          | string (comma-separated)         |
|:--------------------|:---------------------------------|
| **Possible values** | comma-separated list of node IDs |
|                     | `""`                             |

If a peer listed in this property requests a connection, it will be accepted, even if the
[`p2p.max_num_inbound_peers`](#p2pmax_num_inbound_peers) or the
[`p2p.max_num_outbound_peers`](#p2pmax_num_outbound_peers) are reached.

Contrary to other settings, only the node ID has to be defined here, not the IP:port of the remote node.

> ### p2p.persistent_peers_max_dial_period

Reviewer 2: I don't think our p2p layer uses this. The intervals used here are constants:

https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/main/p2p/switch.go#L27

Author: I thought it's used here: https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/f128c623cb58a6813cd0742565351485c0fa5dbb/node/setup.go#L502C4-L502C32

Then it is used in `maxBackoffDurationForPeer` at https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/f128c623cb58a6813cd0742565351485c0fa5dbb/p2p/pex/pex_reactor.go#L598

Which is used in `dialAttemptsInfo` to determine the backoff time.

Reviewer 2: I see. This is used when dialing it at first. The `Switch` method when reconnecting. Why are them distinct? No idea.
